CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINE
2025 ACC/AHA/ACEP/NAEMSP/SCAI
Guideline for the Management of
Patients With Acute Coronary Syndromes
A Report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association
Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines
Developed in Collaboration With and Endorsed by the American College of Emergency Physicians,
National Association of EMS Physicians, and Society for Cardiovascular Angiography
and Interventions
Writing
CommitteeMembersSunil V. Rao, MD, FACC, FSCAI, Chair
Michelle L. O ’Donoghue, MD, MPH, FACC, FAHA, Vice Chair
Marc Ruel, MD, MPH, FACC, FAHA, Vice Chair
Tanveer Rab, MD, FACC, MSCAI, JC Liaison y
Jaqueline E. Tamis-Holland, MD, FACC, FAHA, FSCAI,JC Liaison
y
John H. Alexander, MD, MHS, FACC, FAHA
Usman Baber, MD, MS, FACC, FSCAI
Heather Baker, E DDz
Mauricio G. Cohen, MD, FACC, FSCAIMercedes Cruz-Ruiz, CHWI z
Leslie L. Davis, P
HD, RN, ANP-BC, FACC, FAHA
James A. de Lemos, MD, FACC, FAHATracy A. DeWald, P
HARM D, MHS, BCPS-AQ C ARDIOLOGY
Islam Y. Elgendy, MD, FACC, FAHA, FSCAI
Dmitriy N. Feldman, MD, FACC, FSCAI x
Abhinav Goyal, MD, MHS, FACC, FAHAIjeoma Isiadinso, MD, MPH, FACCVenu Menon, MD, FACC, FAHADavid A. Morrow, MD, MPH, FACC, FAHADebabrata Mukherjee, MD, MS, FACC, FAHA, MSCAI
Elke Platz, MD, MS, FACEPSusan B. Promes, MD, MBA, FACEP k
Sigrid Sandner, MD, MSYader Sandoval, MD, FACC, FSCAIRachel Schunder, MA {
Binita Shah, MD, MSJason P. Stopyra, MD, MS
#
Amy W. Talbot, MPH {
Pam R. Taub, MD, FACCMarlene S. Williams, MD, FACC **
*Writing committee members are required to recuse themselves from
voting on sections to which their speci ﬁc relationships with industry may
apply; see Appendix 1 for detailed information.
yACC/AHA Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines liaison.
zLay stakeholder/patient representative.
xSociety for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions representative.
kAmerican College of Emergency Physicians representative.
{ACC/AHA joint staff representative.
#National Association of EMS Physicians representative.**ACC/AHA Joint Committee on Performance Measures representative.*
ISSN 0735-1097/$36.00 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2024.11.009This document was approved by the American College of Cardiology Clinical Policy Approval Committee and the American Heart Association Science
Advisory and Coordinating Committee in October 2024, the American College of Cardiology Science and Quality Committee in October 2024, and theAmerican Heart Association Executive Committee in November 2024.
The American College of Cardiology requests that this document be cited as follows: Rao SV, O ’Donoghue ML, Ruel M, Rab T, Tamis-Holland JE,
Alexander JH, Baber U, Baker H, Cohen MG, Cruz-Ruiz M, Davis LL, de Lemos JA, DeWald TA, Elgendy IY, Feldman DN, Goyal A, Isiadinso I, Menon V,Morrow DA, Mukherjee D, Platz E, Promes SB, Sandner S, Sandoval Y, Schunder R, Shah B, Stopyra JP, Talbot AW, Taub PR, Williams MS. 2025 ACC/AHA/ACEP/NAEMSP/SCAI guideline for the management of patients with acute coronary syndromes: a report of the American College of Cardiology/AmericanHeart Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2025;85(22):2135-2237.
This article has been copublished in Circulation .JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN COLLEGE OF CARDIOLOGY VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
ª2025 BY THE AMERICAN COLLEGE OF CARDIOLOGY FOUNDATION,
AND THE AMERICAN HEART ASSOCIATION, INC.PUBLISHED BY ELSEVIER

Peer Review
CommitteeMembersHani Jneid, MD, FACC, FAHA, FSCAI, Chair
Craig J. Beavers, PharmD, FACC, FAHA
Theresa Beckie, PhD, RN, FAHAJim Blankenship, MD, MACCDeborah Diercks, MD, FACC
Bruce Lo, MD jj
Clauden Louis, MD, FACCFaisal M. Merchant, MD, FACCNoreen T. Nazir, MD, FACC
Derek So, MD, MSc, FACCMatthew Tomey, MD, FACC, FAHA, FSCAIFrederick Welt, MD, FACC x
jjAmerican College of Emergency Physicians representative.
xSociety for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions
representative.
ACC/AHA Joint
Committee On
Clinical PracticeGuidelinesMembersCatherine M. Otto, MD, FACC, FAHA, Chair
Sunil V. Rao, MD, FACC, FSCAI, Chair-Elect
Joshua A. Beckman, MD, MS, FAHA, FACC,Immediate Past Chair yy
Anastasia Armbruster, PharmD, FACC
Vanessa Blumer, MD, FACCLeslie L. Davis, PhD, RN, ANP-BC, FACC, FAHALisa de las Fuentes, MD, MS, FAHA yy
Anita Deswal, MD, MPH, FACC, FAHA yy
Victor A. Ferrari, MD, FACCStephen E. Fremes, MD, FACCMario Gaudino, MD, FACC, FAHAAdrian F. Hernandez, MD, FAHA yy
Hani Jneid, MD, FACC, FAHAHeather M. Johnson, MD, MS, FACC, FAHAW. Schuyler Jones, MD, FACC
Sadiya S. Khan, MD, MSc, FACC, FAHA
Prateeti Khazanie, MD, FAHA yy
Michelle M. Kittleson, MD, FACC, FAHAVenu Menon, MD, FACC, FAHADebabrata Mukherjee, MD, MS, FACC, FAHA, MSCAILatha Palaniappan, MD, MS, FACC, FAHA yy
Tanveer Rab, MD, FACC, MSCAI yy
Garima Sharma, MBBS, FACC, FAHA
Daichi Shimbo, MD
Jacqueline E. Tamis-Holland, MD, FACC, FAHA, FSCAI yy
Y. Joseph Woo, MD, FACC, FAHA yy
Boback Ziaeian, MD, PhD, FACC, FAHA
yyFormer ACC/AHA Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines
member; current member during this writing effort.
ABSTRACT
AIM The “2025 ACC/AHA/ACEP/NAEMSP/SCAI Guideline for the Management of Patients With Acute Coronary Syndromes ”incor-
porates new evidence since the “2013 ACCF/AHA Guideline for the Management of ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction ”and the
corresponding “2014 AHA/ACC Guideline for the Management of Patients With Non –ST-Elevation Acute Coronary Syndromes ”and
the“2015 ACC/AHA/SCAI Focused Update on Primary Percutaneous Coronary Intervention for Patients With ST-Elevation Myocardial
Infarction. ”The “2025 ACC/AHA/ACEP/NAEMSP/SCAI Guideline for the Management of Patients With Acute Coronary Syndromes ”
and the “2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Guideline for Coronary Artery Revascularization ”retire and replace, respectively, the “2016 ACC/AHA
Guideline Focused Update on Duration of Dual Antiplatelet Therapy in Patients With Coronary Artery Disease. ”
METHODS A comprehensive literature search was conducted from July 2023 to April 2024. Clinical studies, systematic reviews and
meta-analyses, and other evidence conducted on human participants were identi ﬁed that were published in English from MEDLINE
(through PubMed), EMBASE, the Cochrane Library, Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, and other selected databasesrelevant to this guideline.
STRUCTURE Many recommendations from previously published guidelines have been updated with new evidence, and new rec-
ommendations have been created when supported by published data.
Copies: This document is available on the websites of the American College of Cardiology ( www.acc.org ) and the American Heart Association
(professional.heart.org ). For copies of this document, please contact the Elsevier Inc. Reprint Department, via fax (212-633-3820) or e-mail
(reprints@elsevier.com ).
Permissions: Multiple copies, modi ﬁcation, alteration, enhancement, and/or distribution of this document are not permitted without the
express permission of the American College of Cardiology. Requests may be completed online via the Elsevier site ( https://www.elsevier.
com/about/policies-and-standards/copyright/permissions ).Rao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372136

TABLE OF CONTENTS
ABSTRACT .................................... 2136
TOP TAKE-HOME MESSAGES .................... 2138
PREAMBLE .................................... 2139
1.INTRODUCTION ............................ 2140
1.1. Methodology and Evidence Review ......... 2140
1.2. Composition of the Writing Committee ...... 2141
1.3. Guideline Review and Approval ............ 2141
1.4. Scope of the Guideline .................... 2141
1.5. Class of Recommendation and
Level of Evidence ........................ 2142
1.6. Abbreviations ........................... 2144
2. OVERVIEW OF ACS ......................... 2144
2.1. De ﬁnition and Classi ﬁcation of ACS ......... 2144
3. INITIAL EVALUATION AND MANAGEMENT OF
SUSPECTED ACS ........................... 2147
3.1. Initial Assessment of Suspected ACS ......... 2147
3.1.1. Prehospital Assessment and Management
Considerations for Suspected ACS ...... 2147
3.1.2. Initial In-Hospital Assessment of Patients
With Con ﬁrmed or Suspected ACS ..... 2149
3.1.3. Risk Strati ﬁcation Tools for Patients With
STEMI and NSTE-ACS ................. 2151
3.2. Management of Patients Presenting With
Cardiac Arrest ........................... 2152
4. STANDARD MEDICAL THERAPIES FOR STEMI
AND NSTE-ACS ............................. 2153
4.1. Oxygen Therapy ......................... 2153
4.2. Analgesics .............................. 2154
4.3. Antiplatelet Therapy ..................... 2155
4.3.1. Aspirin ........................... 2155
4.3.2. Oral P2Y12 Inhibitors
During Hospitalization ............... 2156
4.3.3. Intravenous P2Y12 Inhibition ......... 2159
4.3.4. Intravenous Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa
Inhibitors ......................... 2160
4.4. Parenteral Anticoagulation ................ 2161
4.5. Lipid Management ....................... 2165
4.6. Beta-Blocker Therapy ..................... 2168
4.7. Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone
System Inhibitors ........................ 21695.STEMI MANAGEMENT: REPERFUSION
STRATEGIES ............................... 2170
5.1. Regional Systems of STEMI Care ............ 2170
5.2. Reperfusion at PCI-Capable Hospitals ........ 2172
5.2.1. PPCI in STEMI ....................... 2172
5.2.2. Urgent CABG Surgery ................. 2173
5.3. Reperfusion at Non –PCI-Capable Hospitals .... 2174
5.3.1. Timing and Choice of Agent for
Fibrinolytic Therapy .................. 2175
5.3.2. Coronary Angiography and PCI After
Fibrinolytic Therapy .................. 2176
6.NSTE-ACS: ROUTINE INVASIVE OR SELECTIVE
INVASIVE INITIAL APPROACH ............... 2177
6.1. Rationale and Timing for a Routine Invasive or
Selective Invasive Approach ............... 2177
7.CATHETERIZATION LABORATORY
CONSIDERATIONS IN ACS ................... 2180
7.1. Vascular Access Approach for PCI ........... 2180
7.2. Use of Aspiration Thrombectomy ........... 2181
7.3. Use of Intracoronary Imaging .............. 2182
7.4. Management of Multivessel CAD in ACS ..... 2183
7.4.1. Management of Multivessel CAD
in STEMI .......................... 2183
7.4.2. Management of Multivessel CAD
in NSTE-ACS ....................... 2185
8.CARDIOGENIC SHOCK MANAGEMENT ......... 2186
8.1. Revascularization in ACS With Cardiogenic
Shock .................................. 2186
8.2. MCS in Patients With ACS and Cardiogenic
Shock .................................. 2187
9.ACS COMPLICATIONS ....................... 2189
9.1. Mechanical Complications ................. 2189
9.2. Electrical Complications and Prevention of
Sudden Cardiac Death After ACS ........... 2190
9.3. Pericarditis Management After MI .......... 2192
9.4. Management of LV Thrombus After MI ...... 2192
10. IN-HOSPITAL ISSUES IN THE MANAGEMENT
OF ACS .................................... 2193
10.1. Cardiac Intensive Care Unit ............... 2193
10.2. Management of Anemia in ACS ............ 2193JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2137

10.3. Telemetry and Length of Stay ............. 2194
10.4. Noninvasive Diagnostic Testing Prior to
Hospital Discharge ...................... 2195
10.5. Discharge Planning ...................... 2195
10.5.1. Patient Education ................. 2195
10.5.2. Postdischarge Follow-Up and Systems of
Care Coordination ................. 2196
10.5.3. Cardiac Rehabilitation ............. 2197
11. DISCHARGE: LONG-TERM MANAGEMENT AND
SECONDARY PREVENTION .................. 2198
11.1. DAPT Strategies in the
First 12 Months Postdischarge ............. 2198
11.1.1. Antiplatelet Therapy in Patients on
Anticoagulation Postdischarge ........ 2201
11.2. Reassessment of Lipid Levels Postdischarge ..2202
11.3. SGLT-2 Inhibitors and GLP-1 Receptor
Agonists ............................... 2203
11.4. Use of Chronic Colchicine ................. 2203
11.5. Immunization .......................... 2204
12. EVIDENCE GAPS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS ...2204
REFERENCES ................................. 2207
APPENDIX 1
Author Relationships With Industry and
Other Entities ............................... 2230
APPENDIX 2
Reviewer Relationships With Industry andOther Entities
............................... 2236
TOP TAKE-HOME MESSAGES
1. Dual antiplatelet therapy i s recommended for patients
with acute coronary syndromes (ACS). Ticagrelor or
prasugrel is recommended in preference to clopidogrel
in patients with ACS who are undergoing percutaneouscoronary intervention (PCI). In patients with non –ST-
segment elevation ACS who are scheduled for aninvasive strategy with timing of angiography to be >24
hours, upstream treatment with clopidogrel or tica-grelor may be considered to reduce major adversecardiovascular events.
2. Dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin and an oral
P2Y12 inhibitor is indicated for at least 12 months as thedefault strategy in patients with ACS who are not athigh bleeding risk. Several strategies are available toreduce bleeding risk in patients with ACS who have
undergone PCI and require antiplatelet therapy: (a) inpatients at risk for gastroint estinal bleeding, a proton
pump inhibitor is recommended; (b) in patients whohave tolerated dual antiplatelet therapy with tica-
grelor, transition to ticagrelor monotherapy is
recommended $1 month after PCI; or (c) in patients
who require long-term anticoagulation, aspirindiscontinuation is recomme nded 1 to 4 weeks after PCI
with continued use of a P2Y12 inhibitor (preferablyclopidogrel).
3. High-intensity statin th erapy is recommended for all
patients with ACS, and with the option to initiate con-
current ezetimibe. A nonstatin lipid-lowering agent (eg,
ezetimibe, evolocumab, alirocumab, inclisiran, bem-pedoic acid) is recommended for patients already onmaximally tolerated statin who have a low-density li-poprotein cholesterol level of $7 0m g / d L( 1 . 8m m o l / L ) .
It is reasonable in this high-risk population to furtherintensify lipid-lowering t herapy if the low-density
lipoprotein cholesterol level is 55 to <70 mg/dL
(1.4 to <1.8 mmol/L) and patient is already on a maxi-
mally tolerated statin.
4. In patients with non –ST-segment elevation ACS who
are at intermediate or high risk of ischemic events, aninvasive approach with the intent to proceed withrevascularization is recommended during hospitaliza-tion to reduce major adverse cardiovascular events. Inpatients with non –ST-segment elevation ACS who are
at low risk of ischemic events, a routine invasive or
selective invasive approach with further risk strati ﬁ-
cation is recommended to help identify those who mayrequire revascularization and to reduce major adversecardiovascular events.
5. Two procedural strategies are recommended in pa-
tients with ACS who are undergoing PCI: (a) radialapproach is preferred over femoral approach in pa-
tients with ACS undergoing PCI to reduce bleeding,
vascular complications, and death; and (b) intra-coronary imaging is recommended to guide PCI in pa-tients with ACS with complex coronary lesions.
6. A strategy of complete revascularization is recom-
mended in patients with ST-segment elevation
myocardial infarction or non –ST-segment elevation
A C S .T h ec h o i c eo fr e v a s c u l a r i z a t i o nm e t h o d( i e ,c o r -
onary artery bypass graft surgery versus multivessel
PCI) in non –ST-segment elevation ACS and multivessel
disease should be based on the complexity of the cor-onary artery disease and comorbid conditions. PCI ofsigni ﬁcant nonculprit stenoses for patients with ST-
segment elevation myocardial infarction can be per-formed in a single procedure or staged with someRao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372138

preference toward performing multivessel PCI in a
single procedure. In patients with ACS and cardiogenicshock, emergency revascularization of the culpritvessel is indicated; however ,r o u t i n eP C Io fn o n i n f a r c t -
related arteries at the time of PCI is not recommended.
7. Based on one trial, use of the microaxial ﬂow pump in
selected patients with cardiogenic shock related toacute myocardial infarction is reasonable to reducedeath. However, complications such as bleeding, limbischemia, and renal failure are higher with the micro-axial ﬂow pump compared with usual care. Therefore,
careful attention to vascular access and weaning ofsupport is important to appropriately balance the
bene ﬁts and risks.
8. Red blood cell transfusion to maintain a hemoglobin of
1 0g / d Lm a yb er e a s o n a b l ei np a t i e n t sw i t hA C Sa n dacute or chronic anemia who are not actively bleeding.
9. After discharge, focus on secondary prevention is
fundamental. A fasting lipid panel is recommended 4to 8 weeks after initiating or adjusting the dose oflipid-lowering therapy. Referral to cardiac rehabilita-
tion is also recommended, with the option for home-
based programs for patients unable or unwilling toattend in person.
PREAMBLE
Since 1980, the American College of Cardiology (ACC) and
American Heart Association (AHA) have translated scien-
tiﬁc evidence into clinical practice guidelines with rec-
ommendations to improve cardiovascular health. Theseguidelines, which are based on systematic methods toevaluate and classify evidence, provide a foundation forthe delivery of quality cardiovascular care. The ACC andAHA sponsor the development and publication of clinicalpractice guidelines without commercial support, and
members volunteer their time to the writing and review
efforts. Guidelines are of ﬁcial policy of the ACC and AHA.
For some guidelines, the ACC and AHA collaborate withother organizations.
Intended Use
Clinical practice guidelin es provide recommendations
applicable to patients with or at risk of developing car-diovascular disease (CVD). The focus is on medical prac-tice in the United States, but t hese guidelines are relevant
to patients throughout the world. Although guidelinesmay be used to inform regulatory or payer decisions, the
intent is to improve quality of care and align withpatients ’interests. Guidelines are intended to de ﬁne
practices meeting the needs of patients in most, but notall, circumstances and sh ould not replace clinical
judgment.
Clinical Implementation
Management, in accordance with guideline recommen-
dations, is effective only when followed by both practi-
tioners and patients. Adherence to recommendations can
be enhanced by shared decision-making between clini-cians and patients, with patient engagement in selectinginterventions on the basis of individual values, prefer-ences, and associated condi tions and comorbidities.
Methodology and Modernization
The ACC/AHA Joint Committee on Clinical Practice
Guidelines (Joint Committee) continuously reviews, up-
dates, and modi ﬁes guideline methodology on the basis of
published standards from or ganizations, including the
National Academy of Medicin e (formerly the Institute of
Medicine),
1and on the basis of internal reevaluation.
Similarly, presentation an d delivery of guidelines are
reevaluated and modi ﬁed in response to evolving tech-
nologies and other factors to optimally facilitate dissem-
ination of information to health care professionals at the
point of care.
Numerous modi ﬁcations to the guidelines have been
implemented to make them shorter and enhance “user
friendliness. ”Guidelines are written and presented in a
modular, “knowledge chunk ”format in which each chunk
includes a table of recommendations, a brief synopsis,recommendation-speci ﬁc supportive text, and, when
appropriate, ﬂow diagrams or additional tables. Hyper-
linked references are provided for each modular knowl-edge chunk to facilitate quick access and review.
In recognition of the importance of cost –value consid-
erations, in certain guidelines, when appropriate andfeasible, an assessment of value for a drug, device, orintervention may be performed in accordance with theACC/AHA methodology.
2
To ensure that guideline recommendations remain
current, new data will be reviewed on an ongoing basis bythe writing committee and sta ff. When applicable, rec-
ommendations will be updated with new evidence, ornew recommendations will be created when supported bypublished evidence-based data. Going forward, targetedsections/knowledge chunks will be revised dynamically
after publication and timely peer review of potentially
practice-changing science. The previous designations ofJACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2139

“full revision ”and “focused update ”have been phased
out. For additional information and policies on guidelinedevelopment, readers may consult the ACC/AHA guide-line methodology manual
3and other methodology arti-
cles.4-6
Selection of Writing Committee Members
The Joint Committee strives to ensure that the guideline
writing committee contains requisite content expertiseand is representative of the broader cardiovascular com-munity by selection of experts across a spectrum ofbackgrounds, representing different geographic regions,sexes, races, ethnicities, intellectual perspectives/biases,and clinical practice settings. Organizations and profes-sional societies with related interests and expertise are
invited to participate as collaborators.
Relationships With Industry and Other Entities
The ACC and AHA have rigorous policies and methods to
ensure that documents are developed without bias or
improper in ﬂuence. The complete policy on relationships
with industry and other entities (RWI) can be foundathttps://www.acc.org/guidelin es/about-guidelines-and-
clinical-documents/relations hips-with-industry-policy .
Appendix 1 of the guideline lists writing committee
members ’comprehensive and relevant RWI; for the pur-
poses of full transparency, comprehensive and relevantdisclosure information for the Joint Committee is alsoavailable at https://www.acc.org/ guidelines/about-
guidelines-and-clinical-docume nts/guidelines-and-documents-
task-forces .
Evidence Review and Evidence Review Committees
In developing recommendati ons, the writing committee
uses evidence-based methodologies that are based on all
available data.
3,4Literature searches focus on randomized
controlled trials (RCTs) but also include registries, non-randomized comparative and descriptive studies, caseseries, cohort studies, systematic reviews, and expertopinion. Only key references are cited.
An independent evidence review committee is
commissioned when there are $1 questions deemed of
utmost clinical importance and merit formal systematic
review to determine which patients are most likely to
bene ﬁt from a drug, device, or treatment strategy, and to
what degree. Criteria for commissioning an evidencereview committee and formal systematic review include
absence of a current authoritative systematic review,feasibility of de ﬁning the bene ﬁt and risk in a time frame
consistent with the writing of a guideline, relevance to asubstantial number of patients, and likelihood that the
ﬁndings can be translated into actionable recommenda-
tions. Evidence review comm ittee members may include
methodologists, epidemiologists, clinicians, and bio-statisticians. Recommendati ons developed by the writing
committee on the basis of the systematic review aremarked “
SR”.
Guideline-Directed Medical Therapy
The term guideline-directed medical therapy encom-
passes clinical evaluation, diagnostic testing, and bothpharmacological and procedural treatments. For these
and all recommended drug treatment regimens, the
reader should con ﬁrm dosage with product insert
material and evaluate for contraindications and in-teractions. Recommendations are limited to drugs,devices, and treatments appr oved for clinical use in the
United States.
C a t h e r i n eM .O t t o ,M D ,F A C C ,F A H A
Chair, ACC/AHA Joint Committee on
Clinical Practice Guidelines
1. INTRODUCTION
1.1. Methodology and Evidence Review
The recommendations listed in this guideline are, when-
ever possible, evidence based. An initial extensive evi-dence review —which included literature derived from
research involving human subj ects, published in English,
and indexed in MEDLINE (through PubMed), EMBASE,
the Cochrane Library, the Agency for Healthcare Research
and Quality, and other selected databases relevant to thisguideline —was conducted from July 2023 to April 2024.
Key search words included but were not limited to thefollowing: AHA/ACC Clinical Practice Guidelines; acutecoronary syndrome(s); angina , unstable; anticoagulants;
aspirin; atrial ﬁbrillation; cardiovascular diseases; coro-
nary artery disease (CAD); coronary syndrome; emergency
medical services; ﬁbrinolytic agents; hemorrhage; major
adverse cardiovascular events (MACE); morphine;myocardial infarction; non –ST-segment elevationRao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372140

myocardial infarction (NSTEMI); percutaneous coronary
intervention (PCI); prehospital; revascularization; risk;ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI);time factors; treatment outcome.
Additional relevant studies, which were published
through April 2024 during the guideline writing process,
were also considered by the writing committee and addedto the evidence tables when appropriate. The ﬁnal evi-
dence tables summarize the evidence used by the writingcommittee to formulate recom mendations. References
selected and published in the present document arerepresentative and not all-inclusive.
1.2. Composition of the Writing Committee
The writing committee consisted of general cardiologists,
interventional cardiologists, cardiovascular surgeons,critical care cardiologists, emergency physicians, cardiac
imaging experts, advanced pra ctice nurses, clinical phar-
macists, and lay/patient representatives. The writingcommittee included representatives from the AHA, ACC,American College of Emergency Physicians (ACEP), Na-tional Association of EMS Physicians (NAEMSP), and So-ciety for Cardiovascular Angi ography and Interventions
(SCAI). Appendix 1 of the current document lists writing
committee members ’comprehensive and relevant RWI.
1.3. Guideline Review and Approval
The Joint Committee appointed a peer review committee
to review the document. The peer review committeecomprised individuals nominated by the ACC, AHA, and
the collaborating orga nizations. Reviewers ’RWI infor-
mation was distributed to the writing committee and ispublished in this document ( Appendix 2 ). This document
was approved for publication by the governing bodies ofthe ACC and the AHA and was endorsed by ACEP,NAEMSP, and SCAI.
1.4. Scope of the Guideline
The scope of the “2025 ACC/AHA/ACEP/NAEMSP/SCAI
Guideline for the Management of Patients With AcuteCoronary Syndromes ”(referred to hereafter as the “2025
ACS guideline ”) is to incorporate new evidence since the
publication of the “2013 ACCF/AHA Guideline for the
Management of ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction, ”
1the
corresponding “2014 AHA/ACC Guideline for the Man-
agement of Patients With Non –ST-Elevation Acute Coro-
nary Syndromes, ”2and the “2015 ACC/AHA/SCAI Focused
Update on Primary Percutaneous Coronary Interventionfor Patients With ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction. ”
3
The 2025 ACS guideline and the “2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI
Guideline for Coronary Artery Revascularization ”4retire
and replace, respectively, the “2016 ACC/AHA GuidelineFocused Update on Duration of Dual Antiplatelet Therapy
in Patients With Coronary Artery Disease. ”5This guideline
primarily focuses on the management of type 1 acutemyocardial infarction (AMI). It can be challenging todifferentiate type 1 versus type 2 MI. In cases of uncer-
tainty and depending on the bene ﬁts/risks of a speci ﬁc
diagnostic or therapeutic intervention, it may be appro-priate to err on the side of considering an event a type 1acute coronary syndrome (ACS) event until established tobe otherwise.
In the United States, an estimated 805,000 AMIs occur
annually of which 605,000 are ﬁrst MI events and
200,000 are recurrent.
6-8Although signi ﬁcant morbidity
a n dm o r t a l i t ya r ea s s o c i a t e dw i t hM I ,3 0 - d a ya n di n -
hospital mortality rates after STEMI have declinedin part as a result of timely reperfusion andimplementation of evidence-based secondary preven-tion.
9From 2011 to 2021 in the United States, the annual
death rate attributable to coronary heart disease declinedby 15.0%.
6The economic impact of MI is also substantial,
with the total annual cost estimated at $84.9 billion,
including direct medical expe nditures and indirect lost
productivity and wages.10,11The incidence of MI is
higher among Black males compared with non-HispanicWhite males for reasons that are believed to be multi-factorial.
12,13Potential factors th at may contribute to
this disparity include a higher prevalence of risk factorsfor CAD, less use of guideline-recommended medica-tions post-MI, and socioeconomic factors.
14-19In addi-
tion to racial disparities, there are sex-related
disparities in the prevalence, presentation, treatment,and outcomes of ACS even after adjusting for con-founding factors such as income, geography, and edu-cation.
20W o m e nt e n dt op r e s e n tw i t hA C So na v e r a g e
10 years later than men and with a greater burden ofCVD risk factors. Although chest pain remains the mostcommon symptom of AMI, women are more likely than
men to present with accompanying non –chest pain
symptoms.
21-24A delay in recognition of these symp-
toms can result in delays in presentation, diagnosis, andtimely treatment of women with ACS. Studies have alsoshown that women presenting with ACS are less likelyto be correctly diagnosed with an ACS, receiveguideline-directed medical therapy,
25-27and/or undergo
coronary revascularization when indicated.28,29Bridging
these racial and sex gaps will require continued pro-
vider education, better understanding of barriers toaccessing quality care and guideline-directed medicaltherapy, and changes at the community and legislativelevel to address social dete rminants of health such as
income, employment status, neighborhood safety, andaccess to healthy foods.JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2141

In developing the 2025 ACS guideline, the writing
committee reviewed previously published guidelines andrelated scienti ﬁc statements. Table 1 contains a list of
these publications deemed pertinent to this writing
effort. It is intended for use as a resource, obviating theneed to repeat existing guideline recommendations.Some recommendations have been carried forward from
previously published guidelines. If unchanged, those
recommendations remain current. Any changes to theformatting or content of these recommendations aredeﬁned as:
nModi ﬁed: formatting changes (eg, minor verbiage
modi ﬁcations such as PICO[TS] structure)nAdapted: substantive changes (eg, major adaptations,
such as a change in Class of Recommendation [COR],Level of Evidence [LOE], drug, or device classi ﬁcation).
Changes are depicted in a footnote below the recom-
mendation tables.
1.5. Class of Recommendation and Level of Evidence
The COR indicates the strength of recommendation,
encompassing the estimated magnitude and certainty of
bene ﬁt in proportion to risk. The LOE rates the quality of
scienti ﬁc evidence supporting the intervention on the
basis of the type, quantity, and consistency of data fromclinical trials and other sources ( Table 2 ).
1TABLE 1 Associated Publications
Title OrganizationPublication Year
(Reference)
Guidelines
Management of blood cholesterol AHA/ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/ADA/AGS/
APhA/ASPC/NLA/PCNA201830
Prevention, detection, evaluation, and management of high blood pressure in adults ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/
ASPC/NMA/PCNA201831
Primary prevention of cardiovascular disease ACC/AHA 201932
Coronary artery revascularization ACC/AHA/SCAI 20214
Evaluation and diagnosis of chest pain AHA/ACC/ASE/CHEST/SAEM/SCCT/SCMR 202133
Prevention of stroke in patients with stroke and transient ischemic attack AHA/ASA 202134
Management of heart failure AHA/ACC/HFSA 202235
Management of patients with chronic coronary disease AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA 202336
Diagnosis and management of atrial ﬁbrillation ACC/AHA/ACCP/HRS 202337
Other Relevant Documents
Home-based cardiac rehabilitation AHA/ACC/AACVPR 201938
Classi ﬁcation of cardiogenic shock SCAI, endorsed by ACC/AHA/SCCM/STS 201939
Contemporary diagnosis and management of patients with myocardial infarction in the
absence of obstructive coronary artery diseaseAHA 201940
Invasive management of acute myocardial infarction complicated by cardiogenic shock AHA 202141
Mechanical complications of acute myocardial infarction AHA 202142
SHOCK stage classi ﬁcation update SCAI, endorsed by ACC/ACEP/AHA/ESC/ACVC/
ISHLT/ SCCM/STS202143
Management of patients at risk for and with left ventricular thrombus AHA 202244
Cardiac catheterization laboratory management of the comatose adult patient with an
out-of-hospital cardiac arrestAHA 202445
AACVPR indicates American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation; AAPA, American Academy of Physician Associates (formerly American Academy of Physician
Assistants); ABC, Association of Black Cardiologists; ACC, American College of Cardiology; ACCP, American College of Clinical Pharmacy; ACEP, Ame rican College of Emergency
Physicians; ACPM, American College of Preventive Medicine; ACVC, Association for Acute Cardiovascular Care; ADA, American Diabetes Association; AGS, American Geriatrics Society;
AHA, American Heart Association; APhA, American Pharmacists Association; ASA, American Stroke Association; ASCVD, atherosclerotic cardiovascu lar disease; ASE, American Society of
Echocardiography; ASH, American Society of Hypertension; ASPC, American Society for Preventive Cardiology; CHEST, American College of Chest Phys icians; ESC, European Society of
Cardiology; HFSA, Heart Failure Society of America; HRS, Heart Rhythm Society; ISHLT, International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation; NL A, National Lipid Association; NMA,
National Medical Association; PCNA, Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association; SAEM, Society for Academic Emergency Medicine; SCAI, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and
Interventions; SCCM, Society of Critical Care Medicine; SCCT, Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography; SCMR, Society for Cardiovascular Ma gnetic Resonance; SHOCK, Should
We Emergently Revascularize Occluded Coronaries for Cardiogenic Shock trial; and STS, Society of Thoracic Surgery.Rao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372142

TABLE 2Applying the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Class of Recommendation and Level of Evidence to
Clinical Strategies, Interventions, Treatments, or Di agnostic Testing in Patient Care* (Updated May 2019)JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2143

1.6. Abbreviations
2. OVERVIEW OF ACS
2.1. De ﬁnition and Classi ﬁcation of ACS
ACS are typically caused by th e disruption (rupture or
erosion) of an unstable corona ry artery atherosclerotic
plaque with associated partial or complete coronary ar-tery thrombosis and/or microemboli, resulting in dimin-ished blood ﬂow to the myocardium and subsequent
myocardial ischemia ( Figure 1 ).
1,2ACS includes 3 related
clinical conditions that exist along a continuum of
severity: (1) unstable angina, (2) non –ST-segment eleva-
tion myocardial infarction (NSTEMI), and (3) STEMI. Theinitial diagnosis and classi ﬁcation of ACS should be based
on the clinical history and symptomatology, interpreta-tion of the ECG ( Table 3 ), and assessment of cardiac
troponin (cTn). Unstable angina is de ﬁned by transient
myocardial ischemia leading to diminished ﬂow in the
absence of signi ﬁcant myonecrosis detected by circu-
lating troponin. In contrast, patients with more prolonged
or severe myocardial ischemia are diagnosed with MI andhave elevated biomarkers of myonecrosis. Patients withNSTEMI may have a partially occluded coronary arteryleading to subendocardial ischemia, while those withSTEMI typically have a compl etely occluded vessel lead-
ing to transmural myocardia li s c h e m i aa n di n f a r c t i o n
(Figure 2 ).
3,4The pathophysiology of ACS can be dynamic
and thus patients can rapidly progress from one clinical
condition (eg, unstable angina, NSTEMI, STEMI) toanother during the course of their presentation and initialevaluation and treatment. Other, less common causes ofmyocardial ischemia, among others, include coronary ar-tery spasm, embolism, and dissection.
3
This guideline will focus on the acute management of
ACS, including unstable angina, NSTEMI, and STEMI,
which are presumed to result from atherosclerotic plaque
rupture or plaque erosion and subsequent thrombosis.4
Under the Universal De ﬁnition of MI, these MI events
would be classi ﬁed as type 1 MI events ( Table 4 ).4The
diagnostic evaluation of chest pain and the managementof type 2 MI, spontaneous coronary artery dissection, andMINOCA (MI with nonobstructive coronary artery disease)are covered in separate documents.
5-8Ad e t a i l e d
description of the approach to the evaluation of patients
with chest pain can be found in the 2021 AHA/ACC/ASE/CHEST/SAEM/SCCT/SCMR Chest Pain Guideline.
5Abbreviation Meaning/Phrase
ACEi angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitorACS acute coronary syndromesAF atrial ﬁbrillation
AMI acute myocardial infarction
ARB angiotensin receptor blocker
ASCVD atherosclerotic cardiovascular diseaseCABG coronary artery bypass graftingCAD coronary artery diseaseCCD chronic coronary diseaseCDP clinical decision pathway
CICU cardiac intensive care unit
CR cardiac rehabilitationcTn cardiac troponinCVD cardiovascular diseaseDAPT dual antiplatelet therapy
DOAC direct oral anticoagulant
ECG electrocardiogramFDA U.S. Food and Drug AdministrationFFR fractional ﬂow reserve
FMC ﬁrst medical contact
GLP-1 glucagon-like peptide-1
HF heart failurehs-cTn high-sensitivity cardiac troponinIABP intra-aortic balloon pumpICD implantable cardioverter-de ﬁbrillator
IVUS intravascular ultrasound
LDL low-density lipoprotein
LDL-C low-density lipoprotein cholesterolLV left ventricularLVEF left ventricular ejection fractionMACE major adverse cardiovascular event
MCS mechanical circulatory support
MI myocardial infarctionMINOCA MI with nonobstructive coronary artery diseaseMVD multivessel diseaseNSTE-ACS non –ST-segment elevation ACS
NSTEMI non –ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction
OCT optical coherence tomography
OR odds ratioPCI percutaneous coronary interventionPCSK9 proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9PPCI primary percutaneous coronary intervention
PPI proton pump inhibitor
QOL quality of lifeRCT randomized controlled trial
ROSC return of spontaneous circulation
(continued in the next column)Abbreviation Meaning/Phrase
SGLT-2 sodium-glucose cotransporter-2
STEMI ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction
UFH unfractionated heparinVA-ECMO venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenationRao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372144

Progressive lipid accumulation and in ﬂammation
within an atherosclerotic plaque may lead to plaqueinstability.
1Rupture of the atherosclerotic plaque and
exposure of plaque contents to the circulation may thenculminate in activation of the coagulation cascade andsubsequent thrombosis. The presence of thrombus maycompromise ﬂow to the myocardium, leading to myocar-
dial ischemia and eventual myonecrosis. Since early
initiation of therapy is imperative for patients with ACS, ahigh index of suspicion is warranted for those who pre-sent with signs and symptoms that could be consistentwith myocardial ischemia.
Patients with ACS are at the highest risk for cardio-
vascular complications acutely, including prior to hos-pital presentation and during the early hospital phase.
With appropriate management, this risk begins toattenuate; however, patients remain at increased risk of
recurrent cardiovascular events for several months toyears after an ACS.
9This may in part be related to the
acute in ﬂammatory milieu that exists after ACS that may
contribute to a heightened risk of recurrent events.Although the point at which a patient transitions frombeing a patient with an acute ACS to one with more
stable or chronic coronary dis ease (CCD) is incompletely
deﬁned, many of the medications indicated at discharge
in patients with an ACS are similar to those for themanagement of a patient with CCD and should beextended more than a year beyond ACS. The long-termmanagement of patients with ACS who are presumed tonow have more stable coronary disease has beendescribed in the 2023 AHA/ ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA
Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline.
10FIGURE 1 Pathobiology of a Type 1 Myocardial Infarcti on Due to Atherosclerotic Plaque Disruption
Progressive lipid accumulation and in ﬂammation within an atherosclerotic plaque may lead to plaque instability. Rupture or erosion of the atherosclerotic
plaque and exposure of plaque contents to the circulation may then culminate in activation of the coagulation cascade and subsequent thrombosis. Whe n this
occurs in the epicardial vessels of the coronary circulation, the presence of thrombus may compromise ﬂow to the myocardium, leading to myocardial
ischemia and eventual myonecrosis. Illustration by Patrick Lane, ScEYEnce Studios. Copyright 2025 American College of Cardiology Foundation, andAmerican Heart Association, Inc.
TABLE 3 Electrocardiographic Interpretation for Pati ents With Suspected Acute Coronary Syndromes
NSTE-ACS STEMI
Electrocardiographic
evidence of ischemiaNew or presumed new and usually dynamic horizontal or down-
sloping ST-segment depression $0.5 mm in $2 contiguous leads
and/or T-wave inversion >1m mi n $2 contiguous leads with
prominent R wave or R/S ratio >1 or transient ST-segment
elevation.New or presumed new ST-segment elevation of $1m mi n $2
anatomically contiguous leads (measured at the J-point) in all
leads other than V 2-V3and$2 mm in men $40 y,$2.5 mm in
men<40 y, and $1.5 mm in women regardless of age in leads
V2-V3.*
Other observed
electrocardiographic
changesMany patients with NSTE-ACS have either nonspeci ﬁc ST-segment
or T-wave changes or a normal ECG. The absence of
electrocardiographic evidence of ischemia does not exclude ACS.Posterior leads (V 7-V9) should be obtained in patients with suspected
left circum ﬂex occlusion particularly in the setting of isolated
ST-segment depression $0.5 mm in leads V 1-V3.
Adapted with permission from Thygesen et al.4Copyright 2018 The European Society of Cardiology, American College of Cardiology Foundation, American Heart Association, Inc., and
the World Heart Federation. Adapted from Kontos et al.11Copyright 2022 American College of Cardiology Foundation.
*ST-segment changes may be observed in other conditions including acute pericarditis, left ventricular hypertrophy, LBBB, Brugada syndrome, righ t ventricular pacing, Takotsubo
syndrome, and early repolarization that may obscure the diagnosis of STEMI.12New or presumably new LBBB at presentation occurs infrequently and should not be considered
diagnostic of AMI in isolation; clinical correlation is required.13A new LBBB in an asymptomatic patient does not constitute a STEMI equivalent.11
ACS indicates acute coronary syndromes; AMI, acute myocardial infarction, LBBB, left bundle branch block; NSTE-ACS, non –ST-segment elevation ACS; and STEMI, ST-segment
elevation MI.JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2145

FIGURE 2 Types and Classi ﬁcation of Acute Cor onary Syndromes
NSTEMI indicates non –ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction; and STEMI, ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction. Illustration by Patrick Lane, ScEYEnce
Studios. Copyright 2025 American College of Cardiology Foundation, and the American Heart Association, Inc.Rao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372146

3. INITIAL EVALUATION AND MANAGEMENT OF
SUSPECTED ACS
3.1. Initial Assessment of Suspected ACS
3.1.1. Prehospital Assessment and Management Considerations
for Suspected ACS
Synopsis
R a p i da n dc o o r d i n a t e dp r e h o s p i t a lc a r ep l a y sac r i t i c a l
role in the optimal management of patients with sus-
pected ACS.11Patients with suspected ACS should be
transported to the emergency department (ED) by emer-gency medical services (EMS).
12In contrast to transport by
private vehicle, EMS transport allows for assessment,monitoring, and treatment of p otentially life-threatening
conditions such as arrhythmias or cardiac arrest duringtransport to the ED.
13In patients with suspected ACS,
trained prehospital personnel should obtain a focusedTABLE 4 Types of Acute Myocardial Infarction According to the Universal De ﬁnition of Myocardial Infarction
Type 1 * Caused by acute coronary atherothrombosis, usually precipitated by atherosclerotic plaque disruption (rupture or erosion) and often associated
with partial or complete vessel thrombosis.
Type 2 Caused by an imbalance between myocardial oxygen supply and demand unrelated to acute coronary atherothrombosis.Type 3 Cardiac death, with symptoms of myocardial ischemia and presumed ischemic electrocardiographic changes or ventricular arrythmia, before bl ood
samples for cardiac biomarkers can be obtained or increases in cardiac biomarkers can be identi ﬁed and/or in whom MI is identi ﬁed by autopsy.
Type 4 4a: Peri-PCI MI caused by a procedural complication and detected #48 h after PCI.
4b: Post-PCI MI caused by coronary stent or stent scaffold thrombosis.
4c: Post-PCI MI caused by coronary stent restenosis.
Type 5 Peri-CABG MI caused by a procedural complication detected #48 h after CABG surgery.
Adapted with permission from Thygesen et al.4Copyright 2018 The European Society of Cardiology, American College of Cardiology Foundation, American Heart Association, Inc., and
the World Heart Federation.*This guideline focuses on the management of type 1 AMI. The diagnostic evaluation of chest pain and the management of type 2 MI, SCAD, and MINOCA are cov ered in separate
documents.
5-8
AMI indicates acute myocardial infarction; CABG, coronary artery bypass grafting; MI, myocardial infarction; MINOCA, MI with nonobstructive coro nary artery disease; PCI,
percutaneous coronary intervention; and SCAD, spontaneous coronary artery dissection.
Recommendations for Prehospital Assessment and
Management Considerations for Suspected ACSReferenced studies that support recommendationsare summarized in the Evidence Table .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
Suspected ACS
1 B-NR1. In patients with suspected ACS, a
12-lead ECG should be acquired
and interpreted within 10minutes of ﬁrst medical contact
(FMC) *to identify patients with
STEMI.
1,2
1 C-LD2. In patients with suspected ACS in
which the initial ECG is non-
diagnostic of STEMI, serial ECGsto detect potential ischemic
changes should be performed,
especially when clinical suspicionof ACS is high, symptoms arepersistent, or the clinical condi-
tion deteriorates. †
3,4
(continued in the next column)Continued
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
STEMI
1 B-NR3. In patients with suspected
STEMI, immediate emergency
medical services (EMS) transport
to a PCI-capable hospital forprimary PCI (PPCI ‡)i st h er e c -
ommended triage strategy, with
an FMC –to-ﬁrst-device time sys-
tem goal of £90 minutes.
5-7
1 B-NR4. In patients with suspected
STEMI, early advance noti ﬁcation
of the receiving PCI-capablehospital by EMS personnel and
activation of the cardiac cathe-
terization team is recommendedto reduce time to
reperfusion.
1,8,9
*FMC indicates the time point when the patient is initially assessed by a health care
professional who can obtain and interpret the ECG and deliver initial interventions (eg,
deﬁbrillation). †Modiﬁed from the “2021 AHA/ACC/ASE/CHEST/SAEM/SCCT/SCMR
Guideline for the Evaluation and Diagnosis of Chest Pain. ”10‡PPCI refers to emergency
PCI in the setting of STEMI to achieve reperfusion in patients without previous ﬁbri-
nolytic treatment.JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2147

history and physical examination (including assessment
of vital signs) and obtain at least one 12-lead ECG sothat the electrocardiographic ﬁndings can facilitate next
steps in patient triage. Speci ﬁcally, patients should be
managed based on the presence or absence of ST-
segment elevation (or suspected equivalent) on the 12-
lead ECG ( Table 3 for STEMI electrocardiographic
criteria). When possible, electrocardiographic tracingscan be transmitted to the PPCI center while en route tohelp expedite coronary re perfusion upon arrival.
Because patients with ACS and evidence of heart failure(HF), ventricular arrhythmias, or cardiogenic shock inthe prehospital setting are at highest risk for death,
identi ﬁcation of these complications is important with
subsequent triage of these patients to a PCI-capablefacility when possible ( Section 8 ,“Cardiogenic Shock
Management ”).
14,15
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. The early acquisition and recording of prehospital 12-
lead ECGs by trained personnel is associated with
shorter reperfusion times and lower mortality rates
from STEMI if this diagnostic information is integratedin patients ’care.
1,2,16Appropriately trained EMS
personnel (ie, paramedics) can interpret 12-lead ECGsfor the identi ﬁcation of STEMI with high accuracy.
17
When ST-segment elevation or an equivalent ﬁnding
is present on the initial ECG ( Table 3 ), initial manage-
ment and triage should follow the prescribed STEMI
treatment algorithm. Electrocardiographic changes are
not required to con ﬁrm a diagnosis of non-ST-segment
elevation ACS (NSTE-ACS).
2. In patients for whom the initial ECG is nondiagnostic,
serial ECGs should be performed during transport tothe hospital especially when clinical suspicion of ACSis high, ischemic symptoms are persistent, or theclinical condition deteriorates.
3,4Acquisition of sub-
sequent ECGs should not delay transport to a hospi-
tal. A second and/or third ECG during EMS transportmay identify up to 15% of additional STEMI cases notpresent on the ﬁrst ECG.
3In an observational study
of 728 patients with suspected ACS who underwentserial prehospital ECGs, a STEMI diagnosis was sub-sequently made in 8% of patients following an initialnondiagnostic ECG with a m edian of 12 minutes aftertheﬁrst study.
4Posterior ECG leads (V 7-V9)s h o u l db e
applied in patients with ongoing symptoms and anondiagnostic ECG and those with ST-segment de-pressions in leads V
1-V3to assess for ST-segment
elevation in the posterior leads, which could indi-
cate a posterior STEMI.
3. PPCI is the preferred method of reperfusion for pa-
tients with STEMI.18Rapid reperfusion of the infarct-
related artery is associated with improved myocardialsalvage and improved survival.
19,20For those who are
managed by PPCI, each 30 minutes of delay is associ-ated with an increase in th e relative risk of 1-year
m o r t a l i t yb y7 . 5 % .
19As such, evidence supports
system-level interventions to reduce time-to-device.11
Patients with prehospital identi ﬁcation of STEMI
should preferentially be transported to a PCI-capablehospital with a goal of FMC –to–ﬁrst-device time
of#90 minutes.
20For patients who are directly trans-
ported to the hospital by EMS, the time to treatmentgoal is de ﬁned as the FMC by EMS until coronary
reperfusion. Direct transfer to a PCI-capable facility has
been associated with shor ter reperfusion times and
lower mortality compared with transport to the closestnon –PCI-capable hospital.
21In prehospital settings
where a FMC –to–ﬁrst-device goal of #90 minutes is not
feasible in patients with STEMI, direct transport to aPCI-capable hospital may be considered if the antici-pated FMC-to-device time is #120 minutes.
22,23See
Section 5.1 ,“Regional Systems of STEMI Care, ”for
further details.
4. The implementation of several care processes has
demonstrated signi ﬁcant reductions in reperfusion
times in patients with STEMI when implementedwithin a regional medical system.
24These include (1)
prehospital catheterization laboratory activation, (2)
single call transfer protocol for patients from a non-PCI facility, and (3) ED bypass to transport patients
directly to the catheteriza tion laboratory for those
presenting by EMS to a PCI-capable hospital, and fortransfers from other facilities. In particular, the pre-hospital activation of catheterization laboratories hasbeen associated with lower short- and long-termmortality in patients presenting with STEMI.
1,8,25
See Section 5.1 ,“Regional Systems of STEMI Care, ”
for further details.Rao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372148

3.1.2. Initial In-Hospital Assessment of Patients With Con ﬁrmed
or Suspected ACS
Synopsis
Chest pain is the second most common presenting
complaint to EDs in the United States and has a wide arrayof potential causes, including ACS.
14Although most pa-
tients with chest pain will not have an ultimate diagnosisof ACS, a missed ACS event has signi ﬁcant implications
for the patient ’s morbidity and mortality. Patients pre-
senting with signs or symptoms of ACS should undergo ahistory and physical examination, have timely electro-
cardiographic acquisition and interpretation ( Table 3 ),
and assessment of cardiac troponin, because these testsare central to the diagnosis of MI
15a n dw i l lg u i d ep a t i e n t
management ( Figure 3 ). A thorough description of theevaluation of patients with suspected ACS is provided in
the “2021 AHA/ACC/ASE/CHEST/SAEM/SCCT/SCMR
Guideline for the Evaluation and Diagnosis of ChestPain. ”
13Initial medical treatment should begin immedi-
ately for patients with presumed ACS. Urgent echocardi-
ography, which may include an initial point-of-care
ultrasound by trained clinicians, is indicated for patientswith cardiogenic shock, hemodynamic instability, or forsuspected mechanical comp lications. For patients with
suspected STEMI, rapid reperf usion is critical after diag-
nosis, and further diagnostic testing should not delaycardiac catheterization or ﬁbrinolytic therapy unless it
would immediately change patient management. For pa-
tients who warrant additional testing to con ﬁrm a diag-
nosis of ACS, selection of the method of assessment mayencompass several factors, including clinical history,
electrocardiographic ﬁndings, cardiac biomarkers, patient
preference, and patient exercise capacity. The use ofevidence-based clinical decision pathways (CDPs) hasbeen shown to improve outcomes and direct appropriateuse of resources.
13CDPs reduce unnecessary testing in
21% to 43% of patients while maintaining a high negative
predictive value for major adverse cardiovascular events(MACE).
16-19
Recommendation-speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. A focused history and rapid evaluation are critical in
the assessment of a patient with suspected ACS.13Early
recognition and initiation of therapy for ACS improves
outcomes.2,20Rapid electrocardiographic acquisition
and interpretation is required for identi ﬁcation of
STEMI ( Table 3 ). In patients with NSTE-ACS, the ECG
may be normal or demonstrate transient ST-segmentelevation (a high-risk ﬁnding), ST-segment depres-
sion, T-wave inversions, or nonspeci ﬁcc h a n g e s .O f
note, ST-segment depression in the anteroseptal leads(V
1-V3) could indicate an evolving posterior STEMI and
therefore should be managed with a high index of
suspicion with a posterior lead ECG if warranted(Table 3 ).
21Overall, timely acquisition of an ECG is
imperative in patients with a goal to obtain and inter-pret an ECG by a trained clinician within 10 minutes ofpresentation.
1
2. An initial nondiagnostic 12-lead ECG does not “rule
out”or exclude ACS. Electrocardiographic abnormal-
ities may be dynamic. A nondiagnostic ECG should be
compared to prior ECGs, and a repeat ECG should beobtained during the ED course to assess for evolvingchanges.
3Right-sided leads should be obtained in pa-
tients with a concern for inferior STEMI to evaluate forright ventricular involvement.
22Assessment for pos-
terior STEMI with an ECG is described in Table 3 .T h eRecommendations for Initial In-Hospital Assessment of
Patients With Con ﬁrmed or Suspected ACS
Referenced studies that support recommendations aresummarized in the Evidence Table .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In patients with suspected ACS,
acquisition and interpretation of
an ECG within 10 minutes is rec-
ommended to help guide patientmanagement. *
1,2
1 B-NR2. In patients with suspected ACS in
whom the initial ECG is non-
diagnostic, serial 12-lead ECGsshould be performed to detect
potential ischemic changes,
especially when clinical suspicionof ACS is high, symptoms arepersistent, or clinical condition
deteriorates. *
3
1 B-NR3. In patients with suspected ACS,
c T ns h o u l db em e a s u r e da ss o o n
as possible, preferably using a
high-sensitivity cTn (hs-cTn)assay. *
4-7
1 B-NR4. In patients with suspected ACS
with an initial hs-cTn or cTn thatis nondiagnostic, the recom-
mended time intervals for repeat
measurements after the initialsample collection (time zero) are
1 to 2 hours for hs-cTn and 3 to
6 hours for conventional cTnassays. *
8-12
*Adapted from the “2021 AHA/ACC/ASE/CHEST/SAEM/SCCT/SCMR Guideline for the
Evaluation and Diagnosis of Chest Pain. ”13JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2149

timing of repeat ECGs should be guided by the pa-
tient ’s symptoms, especially recurrent chest pain, and
any change in clinical condition.15In NCDR ACTION
(National Cardiovascular Data Registry and Acute Cor-onary Treatment and Intervention OutcomesNetwork), 11% of patients ultimately diagnosed withSTEMI had an initial ECG that was nondiagnostic, and
72.4% of those patients had a follow-up ECG diagnostic
of STEMI within 90 minut es of their initial ECG.
33. cTn is the biomarker of choice for assessing patients for
possible cardiac injury, with hs-cTn assays beingpreferred. cTn is central to the diagnosis of AMI.
15
Given its high sensitivity and speci ﬁcity for myocar-
dial injury, cTn (I or T) should be utilized to detect orexclude myocardial injury.
7In the setting of electro-
cardiographic evidence of STEMI, reperfusion therapy
should not be delayed pending biomarker results.
Ac T nc o n c e n t r a t i o n >99th percentile upper referenceFIGURE 3 Initial Assessment of Patients With Suspected ACS
Colors correspond to Class of Recommendation in Table 2 . *Examples of evidence-based CDPs and de ﬁnition of low, intermediate, and high risk as de ﬁned in
the 2021 AHA/ACC/Multisociety Chest Pain Guideline. ACS indicates acute coronary syndromes; CDP, clinical decision pathway; cTn, cardiac troponi n; hs-cTn,
high-sensitivity cardiac troponin; NSTEMI, non –ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction; and STEMI, ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction.
Adapted with permission from Gulati et al.13Copyright 2021 American Heart Association, Inc., and American College of Cardiology Foundation.Rao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372150

limit (a value unique to each assay) is an indicator of
myocardial injury.15,23,24hs-cTn assays are preferred
over conventional cTn assays because the sensitivityand negative predictive values of hs-cTn aregreater.
4,15In addition, the time interval from chest
pain onset to detection of hs-cTn is shorter with hs-cTn
compared with conventional cTn assays, leading tomore rapid “rule in ”or“rule out ”of ischemia.
25
4. AMI is characterized by a rising and/or falling pattern
of cTn values with at least 1 value above the 99thpercentile upper reference limit and believed causedby myocardial ischemia.
21With the development of hs-
cTn assays enabling detection of circulating cTn at
lower concentrations, CDPs using serial testing of hs-
c T na tp r e s e n t a t i o n( 0h o u r s )a n d1t o2h o u r sl a t e rprovide high negative predictive value, as well asaccelerated recognition of myocardial injury.
9,10,12
Clinicians should be familiar with both the evidence-
based CDPs and the analytical characteristics of thecTn assay (ie, limit of quanti ﬁcation, 99th percentile
upper reference limit, and criteria for signi ﬁcant
change) used in their practice.
24,26Men and women
may have different cutoff values with hs-cTn assays.With hs-cTn assays, changes in hs-cTn concentrationwithin the normal reference range but below the 99thpercentile upper reference limit can signal cardiacischemia and may warrant further evaluation. CDPsincorporating hs-cTn assays with repeat sampling at 1or 2 hours from ED arrival with calculation of the
change or “delta ”hs-cTn can identify patients at very
low risk (eg, negative predictive value >99.5%) based
on assay-speci ﬁcd i a g n o s t i ct h r e s h o l d s .
8,11,27-30How-
ever, when using conventional cTn assays, the sam-pling timeframe is extended to 3 to 6 hours from EDarrival.
31cTn may be within normal range early after
symptom onset especially when a high-sensitivityassay is not used. When using a CDP that in-
corporates a single hs-cTn value, the troponin should
be obtained at least 3 hours after the onset ofsymptoms.
32
3.1.3. Risk Strati ﬁcation Tools for Patients With STEMI and
NSTE-ACS
Synopsis
Substantial variability in short-term mortality and
MACE risk exists among patients with ACS. Individualrisk assessment can inform discussions with patients anddecisions regarding therapeutic interventions. Severalrisk scores have been developed and validated to helpassess a patient ’s short- and long-term risk in establishedACS using commonly available clinical and laboratory
variables. Although seve ral risk scores exist,
1-3the
GRACE (Global Registry of Acute Coronary Events) andTIMI (Thrombolysis In Myocardial Infarction) Risk Scoresfor NSTE-ACS and STEMI ( Table 5 ) are well validated and
may be useful for helping to guide some therapeutic de-
cisions ( Section 6.1 .,“Rationale and Timing for a Routine
Invasive or Selective Invasive Approach ”).
4-7These scores
are not to be used as diagnostic tools, because theystratify patient risk in the setting of suspected orconﬁrmed ACS. Risk assessment using the GRACE Risk
Score has been found to be superior to subjective physi-cian assessment for the prediction of death or MI in pa-
tients with STEMI or inter mediate-risk NSTE-ACS.
8
However, there is insuf ﬁcient evidence that routine use
of risk scores in patients hospitalized for STEMI/NSTE-ACS translates into reduced risk of cardiovascularevents.
9,10
Evidence of HF, such as pulmonary congestion detec-
ted by physical examination, chest x-ray, or lung ultra-sound, is an important risk marker and integral part of the
Killip classi ﬁcation (and thereby the GRACE Risk Score
a n dT I M IR i s kS c o r ef o rS T E M I )i np a t i e n t sw i t hA C S .
11-15
Similarly, elevated cardia c biomarkers provide prog-
nostic information and also are key elements of theGRACE and TIMI Risk Scores. H igher cTn levels in patients
with ACS are associated with an increased risk of death
and MACE
16,17and similarly may be useful for helping
t og u i d es o m et r e a t m e n td e c i s i o n s .4,18Several other
serum or plasma biomarkers may provide additional
prognostic information. In particular, natriuretic peptides(including B-type natriuretic peptide and N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide) may identify those patientswith ACS at increased risk of death, HF, and recurrentMACE.
19,20
Early recognition of cardiogenic shock in patients
presenting with ACS on FMC by EMS or ED providers is
the key to initial triage and risk strati ﬁcation.21Cardio-
genic shock related to AMI is present in 7% to 10% ofthe ACS population and carries a high mortality rate.
22
Early and rapid revasculariza tion for cardiogenic shock
related to AMI is associated with increased survival, andtriage to a PCI-capable hospital and ideally to hospitalsproviding advanced therapies (eg, mechanical circula-tory support [MCS]) is preferred ( Section 8.1 ,“Revas-
cularization in ACS With Cardiogenic Shock ”and
Section 8.2 ,“MCS in Patients With ACS and Cardio-
genic Shock ”). Several scales are available to determine
the severity of shock, and observational data haveshown associations between severity as assessed bythese scales and outcomes.
23JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2151

3.2. Management of Patients Presenting With Cardiac Arrest Synopsis
Approximately 10% of patients with STEMI transferred
by EMS to the hospital are estimated to have an out-of-
hospital cardiac arrest.15Early recognition of STEMI in
resuscitated patients and direct transfer to a PCI-capablecenter is associated with improved survival.
1,2Survival-
to-hospital discharge in the patient who is comatosewith out-of-hospital cardiac arrest is <10% regardless of
etiology.
16Those with a witnessed arrest and a shockable
rhythm have improved survival. Outcomes for patients
with STEMI who are awake after resuscitated cardiac ar-
rest are comparable to patients with STEMI who were notin cardiac arrest.
3For this reason, patients with cardiac
arrest who have achieved return of spontaneous circula-tion (ROSC) and are awake with STEMI on ECG are can-didates for PPCI. However, care should be individualizedin the comatose patient with rapid assessment of the pa-tient ’s clinical features and cardiac arrest characteristics
before proceeding with invasive angiography.
17-19In
contrast, patients who are stable without ST-segmentelevation after out-of-hospital cardiac arrest do notrequire immediate coronary angiography. Coronary angi-ography can be deferred pen ding further risk strati ﬁca-
tion.
8-13
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Observational studies have shown an association be-
tween triage of out-of-hospital cardiac arrest patientsto a PCI-capable facility with improved outcomes.
1,2,15
Data from the CARES (Cardiac Arrest Registry to
Enhance Survival) registry showed that transfer to aPCI-capable center was associated with improved sur-vival in patients with cardiac arrest and STEMI on ECG.EMS should preferentially transfer patients who areRecommendations for Management of Patients
Presenting With Cardiac ArrestReferenced studies that support recommendationsa r es u m m a r i z e di nt h e Evidence Table .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 C-LD1. Patients with cardiac arrest and
STEMI who have been resusci-tated should preferentially be
transferred by EMS to a PPCI-
capable center.
1,2
1 B-NR2. Patients who have been resusci-
tated after cardiac arrest and are
noncomatose or who are coma-
tose with favorable prognosticfeatures and with evidence ofSTEMI, should undergo PPCI to
improve survival.
3-7
2b C-LD3. In patients with cardiac arrest
who are comatose, have unfa-
vorable prognostic features, andevidence of STEMI, PPCI may bereasonable after i ndividualized
assessment.
4,7
3: No Bene ﬁtA4. In resuscitated patients who are
comatose after cardiac arrest,
electrically and hemodynamically
stable, and without evidence ofSTEMI, immediate angiography is
not recommended due to lack of
bene ﬁt.
8-14TABLE 5 Selected Risk Strati ﬁcation Tools for Patients With ACS
GRACE Risk Score (2.0)6,7TIMI Risk Score for
Unstable Angina/NSTEMI *4TIMI Risk Score for STEMI5
Target population ACS Unstable angina or NSTEMI STEMI
Target outcome(s) In-hospital, 6-mo, 1-y,
3-y, death or death/MI14-d all-cause death, MI,
or urgent revascularization30-d all-cause death
Variables used In-hospital risk score
Age
Killip class
Systolic blood pressure
Heart rate
ST-segment deviation
Cardiac arrest on admissionSerum creatinine
Elevated cardiac biomarkersAge$65 y
$3 risk factors for CAD
Known coronary stenosis ( $50%)
ST-segment deviation $0.5 mm
$2 anginal events in prior 24 h
Aspirin use in prior 7 d
Elevated cardiac biomarkers (CK-MB or troponin)Age (65-74 y/ $75 y) (2-3 points)
Killip class II-IV (2 points) *
Systolic blood pressure
(<100 mm Hg, 3 points)
Heart rate >100 bpm (2 points)
Anterior ST-segment elevation or LBBB
(1 point)
Diabetes/hypertension/angina (1 point)
Weight ( <67 kg, 1 point)
Time to treatment >4 h (1 point)
*Score 1 point for each characteristic that is present.
ACS indicates acute coronary syndromes; bpm, beats per minute; CAD, coronary artery disease; CK-MB, creatine kinase-myocardial band; GRACE, Globa l Registry of Acute Coronary
Events; LBBB, left bundle branch block; MI, myocardial infarction; NSTEMI, non –ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction; STEMI, ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction; and
TIMI, Thrombolysis In Myocardial Infarction.Rao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372152

comatose after cardiac arrest, have achieved ROSC, and
have STEMI on the ECG to a PPCI center.2Although the
ARREST (Advanced Reperfusi on Strategies for Patients
With Out of Hospital Cardiac Arrest and RefractoryVentricular Fibrillation) trial did not show a bene ﬁti n
triaging patients to primary cardiac arrest centers, this
study evaluated patients without STEMI on the ECG.
20
2. Nearly one-third of patients with cardiac arrest and
STEMI on ECG have normal neurologic status on pre-sentation to the ED.
3Being alert or with partial/mini-
mal neurologic response on presentation with STEMIafter cardiac arrest is an independent predictor ofsurvival. Observational studies have demonstrated
comparable survival of the awake patient with STEMI
with cardiac arrest to those patients with STEMIwithout cardiac arrest.
3For this reason, patients with
STEMI who have achieved ROSC and are awake shouldundergo PPCI ( Section 5.2.1 ,“PPCI in STEMI ”).
3. In patients who are comatose after cardiac arrest and
have achieved ROSC, but have STEMI on the ECG, anindividualized patient assessment for survival and fu-
tility is essential before proceeding with PCI. Observa-
tional data have identi ﬁed poor prognostic features that
have been validated and incorporated into risk scoresfor this population. These include unwitnessedarrest, no bystander cardio pulmonary resuscitation,
nonshockable rhythm, cardi opulmonary resuscitation
>30 minutes, time to ROSC >30 minutes, arterial
pH<7.2, lactate >7 mmol/L, age >85 years, and end-
stage renal disease on dialysis.
4,21-30Although these
data suggest a lack of clear bene ﬁt for invasive therapies
for patients with STEMI and cardiac arrest who havefeatures indicating an unfavorable neurologic prog-nosis,
4,7this has not been validated in prospective trials.
However, for those patients with favorabl ep r o g n o s t i c
f e a t u r e s ,P P C Ii sa s s o c i a t e dw i t hg r e a t e rs u r v i v a l .4,7,27
4. Six contemporary trials9-14have evaluated the role of
emergency angiography in patients who remain
comatose after cardiac arrest, do not have ST-segmentelevation on a 12-lead ECG, and are electrically andhemodynamically stable. These studies consistentlydemonstrated a lack of bene ﬁt to early angiography
when compared with delayed or no angiography in thestudy population with comparable in-hospital and 6-month survival, as well as neurologic recovery.
31The
relative utility of delayed coronary angiography in this
population is uncertain.4. STANDARD MEDICAL THERAPIES FOR STEMI
AND NSTE-ACS
4.1. Oxygen Therapy
Synopsis
Supplemental oxygen has hi storically been adminis-
tered as part of routine care in the management ofpatients with suspected ACS, although evidence tosuggest clinical bene ﬁti nt h ea b s e n c eo fh y p o x i ah a s
been lacking.
5Randomized trials that have enrolled
patients with MI and without hypoxia have not
demonstrated any clinical bene ﬁt from routine use of
supplemental oxygen ( $6L / m i n )2-4,6and have raised
some concerns that it may increase myocardial injury byincreasing vasoconstriction and increasing oxidativestress.
3
Recommendation-Speci ﬁcS u p p o r t i v eT e x t
1. Use of supplemental oxygen may provide bene ﬁtt o
patients who present with hypoxia (peripheral capil-lary oxygen saturations <90%), including those who
present with acute or chronic conditions that require
the need for supplemental oxygen to achieve an oxy-gen saturation $90%. A systematic review and meta-
analysis of RCTs in acutely ill adults from variousRecommendations for Oxygen Therapy
Referenced studies that support recommendations aresummarized in the Evidence Table .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 C-LD1. In patients with ACS and
conﬁrmed hypoxia (oxygen satu-
ration <90%), supplemental ox-
ygen to increase oxygensaturations to ‡90% is recom-
mended to improve myocardial
oxygen supply and decrease
anginal symptoms.
1
3: No Bene ﬁtA2. In patients with ACS and oxygen
saturations ‡90%, routine
administration of supplemental
oxygen is not recommendedbecause it does not improvecardiovascular outcomes.
2-4JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2153

causes without hypoxia suggested worse short- and
long-term mortality with liberal compared with con-servative administration of supplemental oxygen.
7
These studies were unable to de ﬁne the optimal oxy-
gen saturation target range to minimize potential harmand maximize clinical bene ﬁt. The observed relation-
ship between oxygenation and outcomes appears to beU-shaped with the lowest mortality rate described for
those patients with an Sp
O2of 94% to 96% at
presentation.8
2. Several randomized trials have now demonstrated a
lack of cardiovascular bene ﬁt with routine use of
supplemental oxygen in patients presenting withknown or suspected AMI and oxygensaturations $90%. Although exclus ion criteria varied
among studies, patients with a home oxygen
requirement, active bronchospasm requiring supple-
mental oxygen, or with cardiac arrest at presentationwere excluded.
2-4,6The AVOID (Air Versus Oxygen in
ST-Segment-Elevation Myocardial Infarction) trialinvestigated the effects of supplemental oxygen(8 L/min) in patients with STEMI and oxygensaturations $94% and demonstrated a lack of bene ﬁt
with routine supplemental oxygen, including a
possible increase in myocardial injury and infarct
size.
3DETO2X-AMI (Ef ﬁcacy and Outcome Study of
Supplemental Oxygen Treatment in Patients WithSuspected Myocardial Infarction) evaluated the use ofroutine supplemental oxygen (6 L/min) in 6,629 pa-tients with suspected MI and an oxygensaturation $90%.
2The use of supplemental oxygen
did not reduce all-cause mortality at 1 year and did
not reduce rehospitalization with MI.2,9A consistentlack of clinical bene ﬁt was seen in the study for those
with lower baseline oxygen saturations (90%-94%).10
4.2. Analgesics
Synopsis
Patients presenting with kn own or suspected ACS often
experience chest pain or other uncomfortable symptoms.Rapid and effective pain relief remains an importanttreatment goal to prevent sy mpathetic activation and
adverse clinical sequelae ( Table 6 ). Analgesic therapies
may provide symptomatic relief, but they have not beenshown to improve clinical outcomes in patients withACS.
1,2Nitrates and opiate medications remain effective
treatment options for management of pain in ACS butshould be thoughtfully ut ilized to prevent potential
harm.
3-6In particular, rapid coronary revascularization
should be pursued for patients with ongoing ischemic
symptoms that are not relieved with nitrates, and opiates
should not be used solely to mask these symptoms.Concerns have also been raised that the use of opiatesmay delay gastric and intestinal absorption of orallyadministered P2Y12 inhibit ors, thereby delaying their
pharmacodynamic effects in patients undergoing PCI.
7-10
However, the clinical relevance of these pharmacody-namic ﬁndings remains disputed.
11-14Use of nonaspirin
nonsteroidal anti-in ﬂammatory drugs should be avoided
for management of suspected or known ischemia painwhenever possible.
15-17Use of nonsteroidal anti-
inﬂammatory drugs is associated with increased risk of
MACE in patients with and without prior cardiac disease,with no documented bene ﬁt to support routine use in
patients with ACS.
15-19TABLE 6 Analgesic Treatment Options for Cardiac Chest Pain
Medication Route Suggested Dosing Considerations
Nitroglycerin *SL (tablets,
spray)0.3 or 0.4 mg every 5 min as needed
up to a total of 3 dosesUse in hemodynamically stable patients with SBP $90 mm Hg.
Nitroglycerin * IV Start at 10 mg/min and titrate to pain
relief and hemodynamic tolerability.Consider for persistent anginal pain after oral nitrate therapy, or if ACS is accompanied by
hypertension or pulmonary edema.20-22Avoid use in suspected RV infarction,
SBP<90 mm Hg or a change in SBP >30 mm Hg below baseline. Tachyphylaxis may
occur after approximately 24 h.
Morphine IV 2-4 mg; may repeat if needed every 5-15 min.
Doses up to 10 mg may be considered.Use for relief of pain that is resistant to other maximally tolerated anti-ischemic
medications. May delay the effects of oral P2Y12 therapy.7,9-12Monitor closely for
adverse effects.
Fentanyl IV 25-50 mg; may repeat if needed. Doses up to
100mg may be considered.Use for relief of pain that is resistant to other maximally tolerated anti-ischemic
medications. May delay the effects of oral P2Y12 therapy.8Monitor closely for
adverse effects.
*Nitrates should not be administered after recent PDE5 inhibitor use. Avoid use of nitrates/nitroglycerin within 12 h of avana ﬁl, 24 h of sildena ﬁl/vardena ﬁl, or 48 h of tadala ﬁl.23-25
ACS indicates acute coronary syndromes; PDE5, phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitor; RV, right ventricular; SBP, systolic blood pressure; and SL, sublin gual.Rao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372154

4.3. Antiplatelet Therapy
4.3.1. Aspirin
Synopsis
Aspirin has long been considered an integral part of
antiplatelet therapy to prevent recurrent athero-thrombotic events among patients with ACS.
1-3,6Aspirin
reduces the incidence of vascular death after AMI,3and in
secondary prevention trials (that include patients after
MI), it reduces the occurrence of vascular and coronary
events, including MI and stroke.2Although aspirin use
after ACS was traditionally considered lifelong, a strategyof aspirin discontinuation, rather than P2Y12 inhibitordiscontinuation, may now be considered in the mainte-nance phase after 1 to 3 months in selected patients toreduce risk of bleeding ( Section 11.1 ,“DAPT Strategies in
the First 12 Months Postdischarge ”). Aspirin discontinu-
ation after 1 to 4 weeks after PCI is also appropriate for
patients on a full-dose anticoagulant in combination withcontinued use of a P2Y12 inhibitor ( Section 11.1.1 ,“Anti-
platelet Therapy in Patient s on Anticoagulation Post-
discharge ”). For patients in whom a history of aspirin
hypersensitivity is reported, aspirin desensitization ispreferred whenever possible to allow for initial use ofdual antiplatelet therapy.
7-9The use of a P2Y12 inhibitor is
recommended in all patient s with ACS regardless of
whether they have a history of aspirin hypersensitivity,but should be administered with a loading dose as early as
possible for those patients unable to take aspirin atpresentation.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁcS u p p o r t i v eT e x t
1. Aspirin should be initiat ed with a loading dose (162-
3 2 5m g )i np a t i e n t sw i t hA C Sw i t h o u ta na b s o l u t e
contraindication as soon as possible on presentationirrespective of ﬁnal management strategy (invasive
or noninvasive), followed by a daily maintenancedose ( Table 7 inSection 4.3.2 ,“Oral P2Y12 Inhibitors
During Hospitalization ”). In patients who cannot take
oral medication, rectal or intravenous (where avail-able) administration are options for administration.
Current evidence supports the use of uncoated low-
dose aspirin (75-100 mg) for daily maintenancet h e r a p y .T h e7 5t o1 0 0m gd a i l yd o s eo fa s p i r i ne x -ceeds the minimal effective dose required forplatelet thromboxane A
2suppression, allowing for
some interindividual variability in drug response.10
Among patients with ACS referred for an invasivestrategy, continued use of full-dose aspirin (300-325
mg daily) for 30 days (following an initial loading
dose) was not superior to low-dose aspirin (75-100mg daily) for reduction of MACE but was associatedwith increased minor and gastrointestinal bleeding.
4
In an open-label RCT of patients with establishedatherosclerotic cardiovas cular disease (ASCVD), 35%
of whom had a previous MI, no signi ﬁcant differ-
ences were observed in MACE or major bleeding for
patients treated with 81 mg of aspirin daily and
those treated with 325 mg daily, although a highdegree of crossover between study arms wasobserved.
5Together, these data support the use of
low-dose aspirin (75-100 mg daily) for maintenancetherapy. Based on an association between aspirindosing and outcomes in a post hoc analysis of the
PLATO (Platelet Inhibition and Patient Outcomes)
trial, aspirin doses of #100 mg daily should always
be used in patients treated with ticagrelor.
11Recommendation for Aspirin
Referenced studies that support recommendations are
summarized in the Evidence Table .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
1A1. In patients with ACS, an initial
oral loading dose of aspirin, fol-lowed by daily low-dose aspirin,is recommended to reduce death
and MACE.
1-5JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2155

4.3.2. Oral P2Y12 Inhibitors During Hospitalization
Synopsis
Oral inhibitors of the platelet P2Y12 receptor antago-
nize adenosine diphosphate –mediated activation of
platelets. Across the spectrum of ACS, the addition of aP2Y12 inhibitor to aspirin signi ﬁcantly reduces platelet
a g g r e g a t i o na n dh a sb e e ns h o w nt or e d u c et h ei n c i d e n c eof recurrent MACE but with an increased risk ofbleeding.
1-5,9,10In addition to receiving aspirin, patients
w i t hA C Ss h o u l dt h e r e f o r eb et r e a t e dw i t hal o a d i n gd o s eof an oral P2Y12 inhibitor followed by daily dosing
(Table 7 ). The selection of the speci ﬁct y p eo fo r a lP 2 Y 1 2
inhibitor should involve several considerations, includingthe patient ’s anticipated management strategy and their
risk of bleeding ( Figure 4 ).
1-5,9,10Clinically available oral
P2Y12 inhibitors include clopidogrel, prasugrel, and tica-grelor. Clopidogrel is the least potent oral P2Y12 inhibitorand requires more time to reach its maximal platelet in-hibition after a loading dose, because it requires
biotransformation in the liver to form its active metabo-
lite. Pharmacodynamic variability in response in clopi-dogrel has been well described,
14,15and hyporesponders
may be at increased risk of MACE and stent thrombosiswhen treated with clopidogrel after PCI.
16,17TicagrelorRecommendations for Oral P2Y12 Inhibitors During
HospitalizationReferenced studies that support recommendations aresummarized in the Evidence Table .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
All Patients With ACS (STEMI and NSTE-ACS)
1A1. In patients with ACS, an oral
P2Y12 inhibitor should beadministered in addition to
aspirin to reduce MACE.
1-5
3: Harm B-R2. In patients with a history of
stroke or transient ischemic
attack, prasugrel should not be
administered because of worsenet clinical outcomes. *†
4
In-Hospital Management in Patients With NSTE-ACS
1 B-R3. In patients with NSTE-ACS un-
dergoing PCI, prasugrel or tica-
grelor is recommended to reduce
MACE and stent thrombosis.4-6
1 B-R4. In patients with NSTE-ACS who
are managed without plannedinvasive evaluation, ticagrelor isrecommended to reduce
MACE.
5,7
1 B-R5. In patients with NSTE-ACS, clo-
pidogrel is recommended to
reduce MACE when prasugrel orticagrelor are unavailable,cannot be tolerated, or are
contraindicated.
1
2b B-NR6. In patients with NSTE-ACS plan-
ned for an invasive strategy with
timing of angiography antici-pated to be >24 hours, upstream
treatment with clopidogrel or
ticagrelor may be considered to
reduce MACE.
1,5,8
(continued in the next column)Continued
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
In-Hospital Management in Patients With STEMI
1 B-R7. In patients with STEMI managed
with PPCI, prasugrel or ticagrelor
should be administered to reduceMACE and stentthrombosis.
4,5,9,10
1 C-LD8. In patients with STEMI managed
with PPCI, clopidogrel is recom-mended to reduce MACE and
stent thrombosis when prasugrel
or ticagrelor are unavailable,cannot be tolerated, or are
contraindicated.
11
1A9. In patients with STEMI managed
with ﬁbrinolytic therapy, clopi-
dogrel should be administered
concurrently to reduce death andMACE.
2,3
*Modi ﬁed from the “2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Guideline for Coronary Artery Revasculariza-
tion”12and the †”2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Guideline for the Management
of Patients With Chronic Coronary Disease. ”13Rao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372156

and prasugrel are more potent than clopidogrel and ach-
ieve more rapid onset of inhibition of platelet activationbut with increased risk of bleeding compared with clopi-dogrel. Of note, ticagrelor may cause subjective transientdyspnea in approximately 10% to 15% of patients afterACS.
5The topic of duration of dual antiplatelet therapy is
addressed in Section 11.1 ,“DAPT Strategies in the First 12
Months Postdischarge. ”
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Several trials have demonstrated the clinical bene ﬁto f
oral P2Y12 inhibitors in ACS for reducing MACE butwith increased risk of bleeding. In randomizedplacebo-controlled trials in both NSTE-ACS and STEMI,
the addition of clopidogrel to aspirin reduced risk ofMACE irrespective of management strategy.
1-3In pa-
tients with STEMI treated with ﬁbrinolytic therapy, the
addition of clopidogrel to aspirin reduces 30-dayMACE, including recurrent MI, and improves sur-vival.
2,3Moreover, in randomized trials, the use of
prasugrel and ticagrelor further reduced risk of MACE,
as well as stent thrombosis, when compared with clo-
pidogrel in patients with STEMI (not receiving con-current ﬁbrinolytic therapy) or NSTE-ACS.
4,5The
bene ﬁts of oral P2Y12 inhibitors have also been
demonstrated in patients after coronary artery bypassTABLE 7 Dosing Considerations for Oral Antiplatelet Therapy in Patients With ACS
Agent Setting Dosing Considerations
Aspirin NSTE-ACS or STEMI Loading dose 162-325 mg orally. Aspirin (nonenteric coated) should be chewed, when possible, to achieve faster onset
of antiplatelet action. Loading dose should be administered for patients already on aspirin therapy.
Maintenance dose 75-100 mg orally daily (nonenteric coated)
Clopidogrel NSTE-ACS or STEMI without
ﬁbrinolyticLoading dose 300 or 600 mg orally
Maintenance 75 mg orally daily
STEMI with ﬁbrinolytic Loading dose 300 mg orally if age #75 y; Initial dose 75 mg orally if age >75 y
Maintenance 75 mg orally daily
Prasugrel NSTE-ACS or STEMI without
ﬁbrinolytic, and undergoing
PCILoading dose 60 mg orally
Maintenance dose 10 mg orally daily if body weight $60 kg and age <75 y
Maintenance dose 5 mg orally daily if body weight <60 kg or age $75 y (use caution)
Ticagrelor NSTE-ACS or STEMI without
ﬁbrinolyticLoading dose 180 mg orally
Maintenance dose 90 mg orally twice daily
NSTE-ACS indicates non –ST-segment elevation acute coronary syndromes; PCI, percutaneous coronary intervention; and STEMI, ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction .
FIGURE 4 Initial Choice of P2Y12 Inhibitor in Patients Not Requiring an Oral Anticoagulant
Colors correspond to Class of Recommendation in Table 2 . ACS indicates acute coronary syndromes; ASA, aspirin; CABG, coronary artery bypass grafting; NSTE-ACS,
non–ST-segment elevation ACS; PCI, percutaneous coronary intervention; and STEMI, ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction.JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2157

graft (CABG) surgery.18-21Guidance on dosing inter-
ruption for patients referred for CABG is in Table 8 .
Duration of administration after CABG is described inSection 11.1 ,“DAPT Strategies in the First 12 Months
Postdischarge. ”
2. In a secondary analysis of the randomized, double-
blind TRITON-TIMI 38 (Trial to Assess Improvement
in Therapeutic Outcomes by Optimizing Platelet In-
hibition with Prasugrel –Thrombolysis In Myocardial
Infarction 38) of prasugrel versus clopidogrel Inaddition to aspirin among patients with ACS, sub-group analyses using an outcome of net clinical
bene ﬁt (MACE events plus bleeding) demonstrated
net harm with prasugrel versus clopidogrel amongpatients with previous tr ansient ischemic attack or
stroke.
4Dose reduction of prasugrel should be
considered in patients $75 years of age and in those
with a body weight <60 kg ( Table 7 ).
3. The randomized, double-blind TRITON-TIMI 38 and
PLATO trials demonstrated that prasugrel (TRITON-T I M I3 8 )o rt i c a g r e l o r( P L A T O )r e d u c e dt h er a t eo ft h ecomposite endpoint of cardiovascular death, MI, orstroke by 16% to 20% when compared with clopidogrel,
as well as reduced the risk of stent thrombosis.
4,5In the
PLATO trial, a nominal reduction in all-cause deathwith ticagrelor compared with clopidogrel was alsoobserved.
5In TRITON-TIMI 38, the P2Y12 inhibitor
(prasugrel or clopidogrel) was only administered inpatients with NSTE-ACS once the anatomy was deemeds u i t a b l ef o rP C I .I nt h eP L A T Ot r i a l ,7 2 %w e r em a n a g e dwith a planned invasive strategy and results in the
invasively managed population were highly consistent
with the overall trial for reducing MACE, as well ascardiovascular and all-cause death individually.
6Both
prasugrel and ticagrelor increase the risk of non-CABGmajor bleeding compared with clopidogrel.
4,5Prasugrel
has been shown to increase life-threatening bleeds.4
Limited data exist to compare the ef ﬁcacy and safety
of prasugrel versus ticagrelor head-to-head. One open-
label randomized trial reported a lower rate of MACEwith similar bleeding with prasugrel administered at
the time of PCI compared with ticagrelor used as up-stream therapy in patients with ACS undergoing inva-sive evaluation.
22
4. The randomized, double-blind PLATO trial of ticagrelor
versus clopidogrel included patients with ACS
managed with or without a planned invasive strategy.Among the 28% of patients (n ¼5,216) who were
managed without a planned invasive strategy, a 15%reduction was observed in the primary endpoint ofvascular death, MI, or stroke with ticagrelor versusclopidogrel that was highly consistent with the 16%reduction in MACE in the overall trial. Similarly, the
ﬁndings for bleeding were consistent with the overall
trial result.
5,7
5. In the randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
CURE (Clopidogrel in Unstable Angina to PreventRecurrent Events) trial, among patients with NSTE-ACSreceiving aspirin and who were medically managed orunderwent revascularizati on, the administration of
clopidogrel signi ﬁcantly reduced the composite of
cardiovascular death, MI, or stroke.
1Although prasu-
grel and ticagrelor further reduce major cardiovascularevents compared with clopidogrel in patients with ACSundergoing PCI, these more potent agents also furtherincrease the risk of bleeding.
4,5Clopidogrel is an
effective alternative P2Y12 inhibitor for use in patientswith high bleeding risk or contraindications to prasu-grel or ticagrelor. In an open-label trial with a high
crossover rate among older patients with ACS under-
going PCI, patients treated with clopidogrel had asimilar rate of ischemic events and less bleedingcompared with ticagrelor.
23Signi ﬁcant interpatient
variability in the pharmacodynamic response to clopi-dogrel has been described.
15
6. In a prospective substudy among the patients who
underwent PCI (n ¼2,658) in the CURE trial, those who
were pretreated with clopidogrel (median 6 days) prior
to PCI had a signi ﬁcantly lower rate of MACE both
before PCI and by 30 days.8Clopidogrel is a prodrug
that requires metabolism by the cytochrome P450enzyme system to form its active metabolite andtherefore may require several hours before signi ﬁcant
antiplatelet effect is observed following a loading dose.A meta-analysis of trials of clopidogrel in patients with
ACS undergoing PCI found that pretreatment with
clopidogrel signi ﬁcantly reduced the risk for 30-day
cardiovascular death or MI.
11However, less is known
regarding the need for pretreatment in the era of morepotent P2Y12 inhibitors with more rapid onset of anti-platelet action. In a randomized trial of prasugrel pre-treatment versus adminis tration at the time of PCI,
pretreatment (median of only 4.4 hours) did not
improve ischemic outcomes, but signi ﬁcantlyTABLE 8Management of Oral P2Y12 Inhibitors for
Patients Who Require CABG Surgery *
Clopidogrel Elective CABG: Interrupt for 5 d before surgery.
Urgent CABG: Interruption for at least 24 h (ideally) and
proceeding earlier than 5 d may be reasonable.
Prasugrel Elective CABG: Interrupt for 7 d before surgery.
Urgent CABG: Interruption for at least 24 h (ideally) and
proceeding earlier than 7 d may be reasonable.
Ticagrelor Elective CABG: Interrupt for 3-5 d before surgery.
Urgent CABG: Interruption for at least 24 h (ideally) and
proceeding earlier than 5 d may be reasonable.
*For all patients, oral P2Y12 inhibitor should be resumed after surgery when bleeding
risk not excessive (typically 24-72 hours).
CABG indicates coronary artery bypass grafting.Rao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372158

increased bleeding.24In the PLATO trial, knowledge of
coronary anatomy prior to ad ministration of the study
drug was not required; however, upstream use ofticagrelor was not speci ﬁcally compared with a strategy
of administration at time of PCI. Therefore, it remains
unknown whether a bene ﬁt exists for administration of
ticagrelor prior to PCI in patients with NSTE-ACS. Forthis reason, routine pretre atment in patients under-
going an early invasive management strategy ( <24
hours) is not supported by clinical trial data. However,it may be reasonable to consider pretreatment withclopidogrel or ticagrelor in patients undergoing aninvasive management strategy with the timing of
angiography anticipated to be $24 hours from admin-
istration of the loading dose.
7. The clinical ef ﬁcacy of prasugrel and ticagrelor
compared with clopidogrel in TRITON-TIMI 38 and thePLATO trial was consistent in patients undergoing PPCIor delayed (ie, secondary) PCI after initial therapy forSTEMI.
4,5In the subgroup of patients with STEMI in
TRITON-TIMI 38 (n ¼3,534), prasugrel signi ﬁcantly
r e d u c e dM A C Eb y2 1 %a n ds t e n tt h r o m b o s i sb y4 2 %a t1 5
months without a clear excess in bleeding.9In the
P L A T Ot r i a l ,c o m p a r e dw i t hc l o p i d o g r e l ,t r e a t m e n to fpatients with STEMI undergoing PPCI (n ¼7,544) with
ticagrelor was associated with a consistent trend towardreduction in cardiovascular death, recurrent MI, orstroke, as well as a signi ﬁcant reduction in stent
t h r o m b o s i sa n da n1 8 %r e d u c t i o ni na l l - c a u s ed e a t h .
10
Both TRITON-TIMI 38 and the PLATO trial permittedstudy drug administration prior to the initial angiogramfor patients with STEMI undergoing primary PCI. In aseparate randomized trial in PPCI for STEMI, allocationto prehospital ticagrelor or hospital administration didnot improve the primary endpoint of coronary reperfu-sion prior to the PCI.
25However, upstream administra-
tion of ticagrelor was associated with a reduction in
stent thrombosis with similar bleeding between treat-
ment groups. Registry data have also not shown clearclinical bene ﬁt for preloading a P2Y12 inhibitor in pa-
tients with STEMI,
26but a meta-analysis that included
patients with STEMI showed that clopidogrel pretreat-ment was associated with a lower risk for MACE withoutan increase in bleeding.
27
8. Clopidogrel is effective for prevention of stent throm-
bosis and early recurrent ischemic events in patients
with STEMI undergoing PCI.11As in patients with
NSTE-ACS, in patients with STEMI undergoing PPCI,prasugrel and ticagrelor reduce the risk of recurrentMACE compared with clopidogrel.
9,10Administration
of clopidogrel is an alternative to prasugrel or tica-grelor in patients with STEMI who are at highbleeding risk or have other contraindications to those
agents.9. In the CLARITY (Clopidogrel as Adjunctive Reperfu-
sions Therapy)-TIMI 28 trial, addition of clopidogrelt oa s p i r i ni np a t i e n t sw i t hS T E M Iw h ow e r e <75 years
of age and received ﬁbrinolytic therapy reduced the
odds of an occluded infarct-related artery at angiog-
raphy, as well as the composite of cardiovascular
death, recurrent MI, or recurrent ischemia requiringurgent revascularization by 30 days.
2In the ran-
domized, placebo-controlled COMMIT (Clopidogreland Metoprolol in Myocardia lI n f a r c t i o nT r i a l )s t u d y
among patients with suspected MI (93% STEMI, 54%ﬁbrinolytic-treated) receiving aspirin, clopidogrel 75
mg/day (without a loading dose), signi ﬁcantly low-
ered the risk of the composite endpoint of death,
reinfarction, or stroke, as well as the endpoint ofmortality alone, with a consistent pattern in thesubgroup treated with ﬁbrinolytic.
3No signi ﬁcant
excess was observed in bleeding with clopidogrelversus placebo. Based on the design of these 2 trials,when administered concurrently with ﬁbrinolytic as
the reperfusion strategy, clopidogrel is recommended
to be administered with a loading dose (300 mg, then
75 mg daily) for patients <75 years of age and start-
ing without a loading dose (75 mg daily) forpatients $75 years of age. In patients treated with a
ﬁbrinolytic agent who are undergoing subsequent
PCI, either clopidogre lo rt i c a g r e l o r( a g e <75 years,
within 24 hours after a ﬁbrinolytic agent) or prasu-
grel (>24 hours after a ﬁbrinolytic agent) are alter-
natives to support PCI.
9-12 ,28In a trial of 3,799
patients with STEMI who were treated with a ﬁbri-
nolytic agent, 89% of whom also received clopidogrelat the time of a ﬁbrinolytic agent, randomization to
ticagrelor administered at a median of 11.4 hours
(interquartile range, 5.8-18.2 hours) after ﬁbrinolytic
therapy was noninferior to clopidogrel with respectto major bleeding.
28
4.3.3. Intravenous P2Y12 Inhibition
Recommendation for Intravenous P2Y12 Inhibition
Referenced studies that support recommendations aresummarized in the Evidence Table .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
2b B-R1. Among patients with ACS under-
going PCI who have not receiveda P2Y12 inhibitor, intravenous
cangrelor may be reasonable to
reduce periprocedural ischemicevents. *
1-4
*Reproduced from the “2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Guideline for Coronary Artery
Revascularization. ”5JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2159

Synopsis
Cangrelor is a direct-acting, intravenous antagonist of
the P2Y12 receptor characterized by rapid and potentplatelet inhibitory effects w ith restoration of platelet
function occurring within 1 hour of drug discontinuation.
6
These pharmacological prop erties may be particularly
bene ﬁcial in clinical scenarios wherein absorption of
orally administered P2Y12 inhibitors is impaired or notp o s s i b l e ,a sw e l la si np a t i e n t sr e q u i r i n gC A B Go ro t h e rsurgery early after PCI when prolonged discontinuation ofa P2Y12 inhibitor may not be safe.
7The safety and ef ﬁcacy
of cangrelor has been compared with clopidogrel orplacebo in 3 RCTs involving patients who are P2Y12
inhibitor-naïve and undergoing PCI for stable or acute
indications.
1-3In a patient-level pooled analysis of these
studies, cangrelor administered during PCI signi ﬁcantly
reduced periprocedural ischemic events albeit at theexpense of more frequent minor bleeding.
4The safety and
efﬁcacy of cangrelor versus ticagrelor or prasugrel with
respect to ischemic events hav e not been established. The
transition from intravenous to oral P2Y12 inhibition is an
important consideration to en sure adequate platelet inhi-
bition on completion of cangrelor infusion ( Table 9 ).8
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supporting Text
1. CHAMPION PHOENIX (A Clinical Trial Comparing Can-
grelor to Clopidogrel Standard Therapy in Subjects WhoRequire PCI) examined the effect of cangrelor versusclopidogrel in patients undergoing PCI for acute or
stable coronary syndromes.
2Cangrelor was adminis-
tered as an intravenous bolus prior to PCI followed byan infusion for at least 2 hours or for the duration of theprocedure, whichever was longer. In the control arm,clopidogrel was administered as a 600- or 300-mgloading dose immediately before or after PCI. At 48hours, the primary endpoint of all-cause death, MI,ischemia-driven revascularization, or stent thrombosis
was signi ﬁcantly reduced with cangrelor with similar
effects observed among those presenting with NSTE-ACS (n ¼2,810) or STEMI (n ¼1,991). These results
contrast with the earlier neutral ﬁndings from the
CHAMPION PLATFORM (Cangrelor Versus StandardTherapy to Achieve Optimal Management of PlateletInhibition) trial and CHAMPION PCI (A Clinical Trial toDemonstrate the Ef ﬁcacy of Cangrelor), which
compared cangrelor with placebo and clopidogrel,respectively.
1,3D i f f e r e n c e sa c r o s st r i a l si nt h et i m i n go f
clopidogrel administration and de ﬁnitions of MI and
stent thrombosis may in part account for variability inthe incidence of ischemic events and observed treat-ment effect. In a pooled analysis of these trials, can-grelor was associated with a signi ﬁcant reduction in
periprocedural ischemic events compared with controlwith no evidence of heterogeneity across types of ACSpresentations.
4
4.3.4. Intravenous Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa Inhibitors
Recommendations for Intrave nous Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa
InhibitorsReferenced studies that support recommendations aresummarized in the Evidence Table .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
2a C-LD1. In patients with ACS undergoing
PCI with large thrombus burden,no-re ﬂow, or slow ﬂow, adjunc-
tive use of an intravenous or
intracoronary glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitor is reasonable toimprove procedural success and
reduce infarct size. *
,1,2
3: Harm B-R2. In patients with ACS, glycopro-
tein IIb/IIIa inhibitors should notbe administered routinely due to
lack of ischemic bene ﬁta n d
increased risk of bleeding.
3-5
*Adapted from the “2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Guideline for Coronary Artery
Revascularization. ”6TABLE 9Transition From Intravenous Cangrelor Infusion
to Oral P2Y12 Inhibitor
Oral P2Y12
inhibitorLoading
Dose Timing of Loading Dose Administration
Clopidogrel 600 mg Immediately after discontinuation of cangrelorPrasugrel 60 mg Immediately after discontinuation of cangrelorTicagrelor 180 mg At any time during or immediately after
discontinuation of cangrelor
Recommendations in table obtained from U.S. Food and Drug Administration labeling
for cangrelor.8Rao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372160

Synopsis
Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor inhibitors are parenter-
ally administered drugs that b lock platelet aggregation by
preventing platelet cross-linking via ﬁbrinogen or von
Willebrand factor binding to the glycoprotein IIb/IIIa re-
ceptor. These agents were ﬁrst evaluated before
contemporary antiplatelet an d interventional strategies
w e r ei n t r o d u c e da n di na ne r aw h e nt h et i m et oc o r o n a r yrevascularization was substantially longer than today.Thus, limited data are available for glycoprotein IIb/IIIareceptors in patients receiving more potent P2Y12 in-hibitors and in those receiving earlier PCI with contem-porary drug-eluting stents that have a lower risk for stent
thrombosis than prior generations of stents. In current
practice, the role of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor in-hibitors is largely limited to adjunctive use at the time ofPCI in patients with large thrombus burden or as “rescue ”
or“bailout ”therapy in patients with PCI complications
such as no-re ﬂow or persistent or recurring thrombus at
the lesion.
1
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. In a study of 452 selected high-risk patients with
large anterior STEMI and a large thrombus burden,adjunctive use of intracoronary abciximab reducedthrombus burden and infarct size.
1Other trials have
also suggested that glycoprot ein IIb/IIIa inhibitors can
reduce intracoronary thrombus burden in patientswith STEMI and NSTE-ACS.
7,8Thus, glycoprotein IIb/
IIIa receptor inhibitors can be considered at the time
of PCI for patients with a large coronary thrombusburden or no-re ﬂow or slow ﬂow that is believed to
be attributable to distal embolization of thrombus. Inclinical trials comparing intravenous and intra-coronary administration of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa in-
h i b i t o r s ,c l i n i c a la n db l e e d i n go u t c o m e s ,a sw e l la sthrombus resolution and inf arct size, have generally
been similar.
2,9,10
2. Multiple strategies have been evaluated for use of
glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor inhibitors in patientswith ACS. “Upstream ”administration of these agents
is de ﬁned as administration of small molecule agents
(eptiﬁbatide or tiro ﬁban) early after ACS diagnosis for
medical stabilization prior to planned angiographya n dP C I .I nt h eE A R L Y - A C S( E a r l yG l y c o p r o t e i nI I b /
IIIa Inhibition in Patients with Non-ST-segment
Elevation Acute Coronary Sy ndrome) trial, 9,406 pa-
tients with NSTE-ACS were randomized to routineupstream use of epti ﬁbatide (within 8 hours after
presentation to the hospital) versus ad hoc adjunctiveuse at the time of PCI among patients with NSTE-ACS.
4Ischemic outcomes were not improved andbleeding was increased in the routine upstream
eptiﬁbatide arm. An alternative approach is routine
adjunctive use of a glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitor att h et i m eo fP C If o rp a t i e n t sw i t hS T E M Io rN S T E - A C S .Although early trials perfo rmed prior to use of potent
P2Y12 inhibitors suggested that this approach
improved procedural outcomes and reduced peri-procedural myocardial necrosis, studies performedamong patients receiving pretreatment with clopi-dogrel have not con ﬁrmed reduction of ischemic
events with routine adjunctive glycoprotein IIb/IIIainhibition and have increased bleedingcomplications.
5,11
4.4. Parenteral Anticoagulation
Recommendations for Parenteral Anticoagulation
Referenced studies that support recommendations aresummarized in the Evidence Table .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
NSTE-ACS: Upstream *Anticoagulant Therapy
1 B-R1. In patients with NSTE-ACS,
intravenous unfractionated hep-
arin (UFH) is useful to reduceischemic events. †
1-4
1 B-R2. In patients with NSTE-ACS in
whom an early invasive approachis not anticipated, either enox-
aparin or fondaparinux are rec-
ommended alternatives to UFHto reduce ischemic events.
5-11
Anticoagulant Therapy in Patients Undergoing
Coronary Revascularization
1 C-LD3. In patients with ACS undergoing
coronary revascularization (CABG
o rP C I )i nt h es a m ea d m i s s i o n ,
parenteral anticoagulationshould be continued until revas-cularization to reduce ischemic
events.
12,13
Anticoagulant Therapy to Support PCI in ACS
(STEMI and NSTE-ACS)
1 C-EO4. In patients with ACS undergoing
PCI, intravenous UFH is useful toreduce ischemic events. †
(continued on the next page)JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2161

Synopsis
Parenteral anticoagulation is recommended for all pa-
tients with ACS, irrespective of the initial treatmentstrategy, to treat the underlying pathophysiologic process(coronary atherothrombosis) and reduce the risk of
recurrent MACE ( Table 10 ). Although eventual diagnostic
reclassi ﬁcation can occur (ie, to other non-
atherothrombotic ACS diagn oses such as coronary spasm
or other conditions that can mimic ACS, such as stresscardiomyopathy or myocarditis), initial parenteral anti-coagulation is intended to treat thrombus caused byatherosclerotic plaque disru ption (rupture or erosion) in
patients with presumed type 1 MI.
32Anticoagulation
s t r a t e g i e sa r et ob ei n i t i a t e du p s t r e a m( a tt h et i m eo f
diagnosis and prior to coronary angiography) and tosupport PCI or other reperfusion therapy. In patients withACS undergoing PCI, intraprocedural thrombin genera-tion and platelet aggregation may occur, for which reasonparenteral anticoagulation is recommended to reduce therisk for thrombotic complications.
33The choice of a
parenteral anticoagulant can be complex because it is
inﬂuenced by various factors, including vascular access
site, renal function, and concomitant use of other anti-platelet or anticoagulant agents. Heparin-inducedthrombocytopenia can occur with both UFH and low-molecular-weight heparin; in this context, argatrobanand bivalirudin are direct thrombin inhibitors that areacceptable alternative anticoagulants for patients withknown heparin-induced thrombocytopenia.
34,35
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. UFH has traditionally been the preferred anticoagu-
lant to treat patients with NSTE-ACS.1-4However,
limitations to its use include the lack of a predictabledose response and risk of heparin-induced thrombo-cytopenia.
33In unstable angina, a meta-analysis
including 1,353 patients enrolled from 6 randomized
studies showed that, in comparison to patients
t r e a t e dw i t ha s p i r i na l o n e ,t h o s et r e a t e dw i t ha s p i r i nand heparin were at lower, albeit nonstatisticallysigni ﬁcant, risk for MI or death during the randomized
treatment period (relative risk, 0.67 [95% CI, 0.44-1.02]).
3Its ef ﬁcacy compared with placebo has not
been evaluated in the current era of dual antiplatelettherapy (DAPT) and early revascularization.
33
2. Fondaparinux, a synthe tic pentasaccharide that
selectively binds antithrombin and causes rapid andpredictable inhibition of Factor Xa, was evaluated inContinued
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-R5. In patients with STEMI undergo-
ing PCI, bivalirudin is useful as an
alternative to UFH to reduce
mortality and bleeding. †14-19
2b B-R6. In patients with NSTE-ACS un-
dergoing PCI, bivalirudin may be
reasonable as an alternative to
UFH to reduce bleeding. †16,20-23
2b B-R7. In patients with ACS, intravenous
enoxaparin may be considered asan alternative to UFH at the timeof PCI to reduce ischemic
events. ‡
7,8,24-26
3: Harm B-R8. In patients with ACS, fondapar-
inux should not be used to sup-
port PCI because of the risk ofcatheter thrombosis.
5,27
STEMI: Anticoagulant Therapy Treated With Fibrinolytic Therapy
1A9. In patients with STEMI treated
with ﬁbrinolytic therapy, paren-
teral anticoagulation should be
continued for the duration of thehospital stay (maximum of 8days) or until revascularization is
performed to reduce ischemic
events.
9,10,27-29
1A10. In patients with STEMI treated
with ﬁbrinolytic therapy who
are not intended to undergo aninvasive approach, enoxaparin is
the recommended anticoagu-
lant to reduce ischemicevents.
9,10,28,29
1 B-R11. In patients with STEMI treated
with ﬁbrinolytic therapy who are
not intended to undergo an
invasive approach, fondaparinux
is a recommended alternative toreduce ischemic events.
27,30
*At the time of diagnosis and prior to invasive coronary angiography if planned.
†Adapted or ‡modiﬁed from the “2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Guideline for Coronary Artery
Revascularization. ”31Rao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372162

patients with high-risk NSTE-ACS in the OASIS-5
(Fifth Organization to Assess Strategies in AcuteIschemic Syndromes) trial.
5Fondaparinux was similar
to enoxaparin in the risk for ischemic events at 9 days,but it reduced major bleeding. About 40% of the pa-tients underwent PCI, and an increase was observedin the rate of guiding-catheter thrombus formation
with fondaparinux (0.9% versus 0.3%) compared with
enoxaparin. In NSTE-ACS, despite some data favoringthe use of enoxaparin over UFH,
11multiple meta-
analyses have not demonstrated compelling superi-ority in ef ﬁcacy over UFH.
7,26,36A meta-analysis
comparing low-molecular-weight heparin to UFH in12,171 patients with ACS without ST-segment eleva-tion across 5 randomized trials showed no signi ﬁcant
difference in death or MI (2.2% versus 2.3%) or in the
risk of major bleeding.
36
3. For patients with ACS undergoing coronary revascu-
larization (CABG or PCI), parenteral anticoagulation isindicated until revascularization. The prematurediscontinuation of anticoagulation is associated witha transient rebound increase in thrombin activity andactivated protein C and the reactivation of ischemic
events,
12,13with the greatest risk for reinfarction in
theﬁrst 4 to 8 hours after the discontinuation of
anticoagulation.
4. UFH has traditionally been the preferred anticoagu-
lant to support PCI in patients with NSTE-ACS. Acti-vated clotting time is used to guide dosing duringPCI.
37Although its pharmacokinetic effects are not
always predictable, its anticoagulant effect is revers-ible with the administration of protamine.
5. Bivalirudin is a direct thrombin inhibitor evaluated
in both NSTE-ACS and STEMI that can be used tosupport PCI. In the BRIGHT- 4 (Bivalirudin with Pro-
longed Full-Dose Infusion during PPCI versus Hepa-
rin) trial,
15which enrolled patients with STEMI
undergoing PPCI using radial access (93%), bivalir-udin was compared with heparin monotherapy in anopen-label design. The bivalirudin regimen usedincluded the standard bolus and dosing (0.75 mg/kg,then 1.75 mg/kg per hour) plus a post-PCI infusion atthe full dose (1.75 mg/kg per hour) for 2 to 4 hours.Bivalirudin with the full dose post-PCI infusion was
superior to UFH in reducing the 30-day composite of
all-cause death or BARC (Bleeding Academic
Research Consortium) types 3-5 bleeding (4.39%versus 3.06%; P¼0.007).
15All-cause death was also
reduced with bivalirudin (3.92% versus 2.96%; P¼
0.04), as well as 30-day stent thrombosis (0.37%versus 1.1%; P¼0.0015). Based on these results,
when bivalirudin is used to support PPCI for STEMI,
a postprocedure 2- to 4-hour infusion at full dose is
recommended.
15,38,39
6. Meta-analyses comparing bivalirudin versus UFH with
or without glycoprotein IIb /IIIa inhibitors in patients
with ACS demonstrate that bivalirudin is associatedwith a lower risk for major bleeding.
16,17,40In theTABLE 10 Dosing of Parenteral Anticoagulation in ACS
Drug Dosing
UFH nInitial therapy: Loading dose 60 IU/kg (max 4,000 IU), with initial infusion 12 IU/kg per h (max 1,000 IU/h) adjusted to therapeutic aPTT
range of 60-80 s.
nTo support PCI: In patients who have received prior anticoagulant thera py, additional UFH as needed to achieve an ACT 250-300 s.
In patients who have not received prior anticoagulant therapy, 70-100 U/kg initial bolus to achieve target ACT of 250-300 s.
nWith ﬁbrinolytic therapy: Loading dose 60 IU/kg (maximum 4,000 IU) with initial infusion 12 IU/kg per h (maximum 1,000 IU/h) adjusted to
therapeutic aPTT range. *
Bivalirudin nTo support PCI: 0.75 mg/kg bolus, 1.75 mg/kg per h IV infusion during the PCI procedure.
nPost-PCI infusion for PPCI: 1.75 mg/kg per h for 2-4 h post-PCI.
nIn patients with CrCl <30 mL/min, reduced infusion to 1 mg/kg per h.
Enoxaparin nInitial therapy: 1 mg/kg subcutaneous every 12 h. Reduce do se to 1 mg/kg per d subcutaneous if CrCl <30 mL/min.
nTo support PCI: For previous treatment with enoxaparin, if the last subcut aneous dose was administered 8-12 h earlier or if only 1 sub-
cutaneous dose of enoxaparin has been administered, an IV dose of 0.3 mg/kg of enoxaparin should be given. If the last dose was
administered within the previous 8 h, no additional enoxaparin should be given.
For patients who have not received prior anticoagulant therapy, 0.5-0.75 mg/kg IV bolus.
nWith ﬁbrinolytic therapy: If age <75 y, 30 mg IV bolus, followed in 15 min by 1 mg/kg subcutaneous every 12 h (maximum 100 mg for the
ﬁrst 2 doses).
If age$75 y: no bolus, 0.75 mg/kg subcutaneous every 12 h (maximum 75 mg for the ﬁrst 2 doses).
Regardless of age, if CrCl <30 mL/min: 1 mg/kg subcutaneous every 24 h.
Fondaparinux nInitial therapy: 2.5 mg subcutaneous daily.
nWith ﬁbrinolytic therapy: 2.5 mg IV, then 2.5 mg subcutaneous daily starting the following day. Contraindicated if CrCl <30 mL/min.
nFondaparinux should not be used to support PCI because of the risk of catheter thrombosis.
*Therapeutic aPTT range in setting of ﬁbrinolytic therapy is 50-70 s.
ACS indicates acute coronary syndromes; ACT, activated clotting time; aPTT, activated partial thromboplastin time; CrCl, creatinine clearance; P CI, percutaneous coronary
intervention; PPCI, primary percutaneous coronary intervention; and UFH, unfractionated heparin.JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2163

context of NSTE-ACS, bivalirudin was evaluated in the
ACUITY (A Comparison of Angiomax Versus Heparinin Acute Coronary Syndromes) trial, where bivalirudinwas noninferior to UFH plus glycoprotein IIb/IIIa in-hibitor for the risk of MACE and superior with respect
to 30-day major bleeding.
41The bleeding de ﬁnition
used in the study was speci ﬁc to the ACUITY trial.
Bivalirudin was also evaluated in the MATRIX (Mini-mizing Adverse Hemorrhag ic Events by Transradial
Access Site and Systemic Implementation of AngioX)trial where it was compared against UFH alone (ie,without concomitant glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitor).
42
No signi ﬁcant difference was observed between the 2
arms with respect to 30-day ischemic or bleeding
events.
7. Intravenous enoxaparin compared with UFH reduces
the risk for ischemic outcomes without a signi ﬁcant
difference in bleeding in the setting of PPCI. In theATOLL (Acute Myocardial Infarction Treated withPrimary Angioplasty and Intravenous Enoxaparin orUnfractionated Heparin to Lower Ischemic and
Bleeding Events at Short- and Long-term Follow-up)
trial,
24which enrolled patients presenting with
STEMI, the primary endpoint of 30-day incidence ofdeath, complication of MI, procedural failure, or majorbleeding occurred in 28% of patients with enoxaparincompared with 34% with UFH ( P¼0.06). Although the
incidence of primary endpoint was not signi ﬁcantly
different between enoxaparin and UFH, the secondary
endpoint of 30-day death, recurrent ACS, or urgent
revascularization was signi ﬁcantly lower in the
enoxaparin group (7% versus 11%; P¼0.015). In
addition, a net clinical bene ﬁt (death, complication of
MI, or major bleeding) was observed with enoxaparincompared with UFH (10% versus 15%; P¼0.03). In a
meta-analysis of 10,451 patients, intravenous enox-aparin was associated with a signi ﬁcant reduction in
death and major bleeding.
26
8. Fondaparinux should not be used as the sole antico-
agulant to support PCI because of the risk of catheterthrombosis.
5,27,31In the OASIS-5 trial, an increase was
observed in the rate of catheter-related thrombus withfondaparinux compared with enoxaparin (0.9%versus 0.4%).
5Similar results were observed in the
OASIS-6 (The Safety and Ef ﬁcacy of Fondaparinux
versus Control Therapy in Pa tients with STEMI) trial
in which a higher rate of guiding-catheter thrombosisand more coronary complications with fondaparinuxwere observed when used during PCI.
27
9. In patients with STEMI treated with ﬁbrinolytic ther-
apy, parenteral anticoagulation is recommendedbefore and after ﬁbrinolytic therapy to reduce
ischemic events. In studies of ﬁbrinolytic therapy
such as the GUSTO (Global Utilization of Streptoki-nase and Tissue Plasminogen Activator for OccludedCoronary Arteries) trial, t he ASSENT-3 (Assessment
of the Safety and Ef ﬁcacy of a New Thrombolytic
Regimen) trial, or the ExTRACT-TIMI 25 (Enoxaparinand Thrombolysis Reperfusion for Acute MyocardialInfarction Treatment-Thrombolysis In MyocardialInfarction 25) study, intravenous heparin wasadministered for at least 48 hours.
10,29,43In the
ExTRACT-TIMI 25 study, the UFH infusion wasgiven for at least 48 hours but could be continued
for a longer period at the treating physician ’s
discretion, whereas the subcutaneous injections ofenoxaparin were continued until hospital dischargeor for a maximum of 8 days (whichever cameﬁrst).
10Patients randomized to enoxaparin had a
lower risk of death or nonfatal recurrent MI through30 days compared with UFH (9.9% versus 12.0%);however, treatment with e noxaparin was associated
with an increase in major bleeding (2.1% versus
1.4%).
10
10. In patients with STEMI who received ﬁbrinolytic
therapy and who are not planned for an invasiveapproach, enoxaparin is the preferred anticoagulantover UFH.
9,10,28,29,44In the ExTRACT-TIMI 25 study,
enoxaparin until hospital discharge or for a maximumof 8 days (whichever came ﬁrst) was compared with
UFH administered for at least 48 hours (could be
continued for a longer period at the treating physi-cian ’s discretion) in 20,506 patients with STEMI
receiving ﬁbrinolytic therapy.
10The primary endpoint
o fd e a t ho rn o n f a t a lr e c u r r e n tM It h r o u g h3 0d a y soccurred in 12% in the UFH group compared with 9.9%in the enoxaparin group. In a meta-analysis of 14randomized trials, UFH did n ot reduce reinfarction or
death in patients treated with ﬁbrinolytic therapy. In
contrast, low-molecular-weight heparin reduced therisk of reinfarction and dea th compared with placebo
and the risk of reinfarction.
45
11. In patients with STEMI who are not likely to undergo
an invasive approach, fondaparinux is an alternateanticoagulant that can be used. In the OASIS-6 trial ofpatients with STEMI who were treated with throm-
bolytic agents (predominantly streptokinase), fonda-
parinux signi ﬁcantly reduced the risk of the primary
endpoint of death or reinfarction at 30 days, includingas i g n i ﬁcant reduction in mortality, reinfarction, and
severe bleeding when compared with placebo orUFH.
27,30Rao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372164

4.5. Lipid Management
Synopsis
The current recommendations focus on patients with
recent (ie, within 12 months) ACS. The 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA CCD guideline provides moredetailed recommendations on long-term management oflipids in patients with prior ACS.
14ASCVD event rates are
substantially higher in patients with recent ACS than
those with CCD, with 1-year rates of cardiovasculardeath, MI, and ischemic stroke estimated at 10% to 15%after an ACS hospitalization.
15,16Higher risk among pa-
tients with ACS supports more aggressive LDL-cholesterol (LDL-C) target si np a t i e n t sw i t hr e c e n tA C S
c o m p a r e dw i t ht h o s ew i t hC C D( Figure 5 ).
14-16RCTs have
demonstrated ASCVD event reduction with multiple
different pharmacological approaches to LDL-C level
lowering, with the magnitude of bene ﬁt proportional to
t h ed e g r e eo fL D L - Cl e v e ll o w e r i n g .17In patients with
ACS, RCTs have demonstrated incremental bene ﬁtw i t h
high- compared with moderate-intensity statin therapyin regard to reduction in MACE.
1-4For patients who do
not reach LDL-C treatment goals on maximally toleratedstatin therapy, or who are intolerant to statins, several
nonstatin therapies, including ezetimibe, monoclonal
antibodies to proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexintype 9 (PCSK9), and bempedoic acid, can both lowerLDL-C levels and improve ASCVD outcomes acrossdiverse populations.
5-10Inclisiran also lowers LDL-C
levels by preventing translation of PCSK9 mRNA, butclinical outcomes studies are not yet available ( Table 12 ).
Nonetheless, the relative bene ﬁto fL D L - C –lowering
therapies is expected to be proportional to the observed
r e d u c t i o ni nL D L - Cl e v e l s( Tables 11 and 12 ).
5-11A lipid
proﬁle is recommended as soon as feasible after pre-
sentation with ACS ( Figure 5 ), because LDL-C levels
decrease modestly beginning 24 hours from symptomonset.
18Lipid management after hospital discharge is
discussed in Section 11.2 ,“Reassessment of Lipid Levels
Postdischarge. ”
Recommendation-Speci ﬁcS u p p o r t i v eT e x t
1. High-intensity statin regimens lower LDL-C concen-
t r a t i o nb ya na v e r a g eo f $50% ( Table 11 ). The CTT
(Cholesterol Treatment Tri alists) meta-analysis of 5
RCTs showed that LDL-C concentration lowering withhigh-intensity statins compared with moderate-intensity statins reduces major vascular events byapproximately 15% in patients with coronary arterydisease (CAD).
4An individual participant meta-
analysis of the A to Z (Aggrastat to Zocor) and PROVE
IT (Pravastatin or Atorvastatin Evaluation and Infec-tion Therapy)-TIMI 22 trials, both of which were per-formed in patients stabilized early after ACS,demonstrated signi ﬁcant reductions in cardiovascular
and all-cause death with more intensive versus lessintensive statin regimens.
19The bene ﬁto fah i g h -
intensity statin regimen appears early after ACS and
persists over time.3The bene ﬁt of high-intensity sta-
tins after ACS appears to be independent of baselineRecommendations for Lipid Management
Referenced studies that support recommendations aresummarized in the Evidence Table .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1A1. In patients with ACS, high-
intensity statin therapy is rec-
ommended to reduce the risk of
MACE. *,1-4
1A2. In patients with ACS who are
already on maximally tolerated
statin therapy with low-density
lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C)‡70 mg/dL ( ‡1.8 mmol/L),
adding a nonstatin lipid-lowering
agent is recommended to further
reduce the risk of MACE. †
5-7
1 B-R3. In patients with ACS who are
statin intolerant, nonstatin lipid-lowering therapy is recom-mended to lower LDL-C and
reduce the risk of MACE.
8-10
2a B-R4. In patients with ACS who are
already on maximally tolerated
statin therapy with LDL-C 55 to69 mg/dL ( ‡1.4 to <1.8 mmol/L),
adding a nonstatin lipid-lowering
agent is reasonable to reduce the
risk of MACE. *
5-7,11-13
2b B-R5. In patients with ACS, the con-
current initiation of ezetimibe incombination with maximallytolerated statin may be consid-
ered to reduce the risk of MACE.
5
*Modi ﬁed or †adapted from the “2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Guideline for
the Management of Patients With Chronic Coronary Disease. ”14JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2165

LDL-C concentration. No indication was observed of
any safety concerns from achieving very low LDL-Cconcentrations on statins or other lipid-lowering ther-
apies; therefore, high-inten sity statin therapy should
not be de-escalated during follow-up in patients whoare tolerating treatment.
13
2. Multiple therapeutic options are now available to add
to maximally tolerated statin therapy to achieved e s i r e dL D L - Cg o a l si np a t i e n t sw i t hA C S( Table 12 ). In
IMPROVE IT (Improved Reduction of Outcomes;Vytorin Ef ﬁcacy International Trial), addition of ezeti-
mibe to simvastatin 40 mg daily in patients <10 days
after ACS led to a modest but signi ﬁcant reduction in
MACE, over a median follow-up of 6 years.
5Clinical
trials of PCSK9 inhibitors have demonstrated a 15%relative risk reduction i n MACE over a median of 2 to 3FIGURE 5 Management of Lipid-Lowering Therapy for Patients With ACS
Colors correspond to Class of Recommendation in Table 2 . *Nonstatin LDL-lowering therapy: ezetimibe, PCSK9 inhibitor (eg, alirocumab, evolocumab and inclisiran),
and/or bempedoic acid. ACS indicates acute coronary syndromes; LDL, low-density lipoprotein; LDL-C, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol; and PC SK9, proprotein
convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9.
TABLE 11Nonstatin Treatment Options for LDL-C Lowering in Patients With ACS Who Are Not at LDL-C Goal on Maximally
Tolerated Statin Therapy
Drug Mechanism of ActionLDL-C Lowering
(%)Outcomes Study Performed
in Patients With Recent ACS? Potential Adverse Effects
Ezetimibe * Blocks NPC1L1 cholesterol absorption 15-25 Yes ( <10 d post ACS) Liver function test abnormalities
Evolocumab Monoclonal antibody to PCSK9 w60 Established ASCVD ( >1 mo post ACS) Injection site reaction
Alirocumab Monoclonal antibody to PCSK9 w60 Yes (1-12 mo post ACS) Injection site reaction
Inclisiran Inhibitor of PCSK9 synthesis (small
interfering RNA)w50 Clinical outcomes trials in ASCVD are
ongoingInjection site reaction
Bempedoic
acid †ATP-citrate lyase inhibitor w20 With or at high risk for CVD ( >90 d post
ACS)Gout; gallstones; liver function test
abnormalities
All agents are approved by the FDA.
*The LDL-C lowering potency of ezetimibe is greater when used in combination with statin therapy (approximately 25% LDL-C reduction) than when used a s monotherapy (15%-20%).
†Coadministration of bempedoic acid with simvastatin at a dose >20 mg and pravastatin at a dose >40 mg is not recommended due to the increased risk of muscle-related adverse
effects from statins.
ACS indicates acute coronary syndromes; ASCVD, atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease; CVD, cardiovascular disease; FDA, U.S. Food and Drug Admi nistration; LDL-C, low-density
lipoprotein cholesterol; NPC1L1, Niemann-Pick C1-Like 1 protein; and PCSK9, proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9.Rao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372166

years including patients >1 month after ACS.6,7,20
Greater absolute bene ﬁt with PCSK9 inhibitors has
been demonstrated in those patients enrolled closer totheir ACS event.
20,21Evolocumab effectively reduces
LDL-C levels early after ACS and has demonstratedfavorable changes on plaque components by intra-coronary imaging in patients with NSTEMI.
22-24Greater
plaque regression has also been reported by intra-
coronary imaging for patien ts treated with alirocumab
after AMI.25Inclisiran is a small interfering RNA tar-
geting synthesis of the PCSK9 protein that is adminis-tered at 6-month intervals after an initial 3-monthdose. Inclisiran lowers LDL-C levels by approximately50% and is well tolerated,
26but clinical outcome
studies are not yet available. Bempedoic acid worksupstream from statins in the liver and leads to
approximately 20% reduction in LDL-C levels. It re-
duces MACE by 13% in statin-intolerant patients whenstarted >90 days after ACS.
10
3. Statin intolerance is frequent in clinical practice and
the most commonly reported c ause is statin-associated
muscle symptoms.27To consider a patient as having
statin intolerance, a minimum of 2 statins should beattempted, including at least 1 at the lowest approved
daily dose.
28Currently available options for patients
with complete or partial intolerance to statin therapyinclude ezetimibe, PCSK9 inhibitor monoclonal anti-bodies, inclisiran, and bempedoic acid. Ezetimibe andPCSK9 inhibitors have been demonstrated to be safeand well tolerated and improve lipid parameters instatin-intolerant patients.
8,9However, outcomes
s t u d i e su s i n gt h e s ea g e n t sa sm o n o t h e r a p yo ri nc o m -
bination in statin-intolerant patients are not available.
Bempedoic acid is an ATP citrate lyase inhibitor thatreduces LDL-C levels by 15% to 25% with low rates ofmuscle-related adverse effects.
29,30A combination
product that combines bempedoic acid with ezetimibelowered LDL-C levels by approximately 35%.
31In theCLEAR Outcomes (Cholesterol Lowering via Bempe-
doic Acid, an ACL-Inhibiting Regimen) trial, bempedoicacid was compared with placebo in statin-intolerantpatients with or at high risk for ASCVD. Patients withACS within 90 days prior to randomization were
excluded from this trial. Mean LDL-C level was
139 mg/dL at enrollment and was reduced by 29 mg/dLwith bempedoic acid compared with placebo. MACEwas reduced by 13% in the bempedoic acid arm. Bem-pedoic acid raised uric acid levels in a small subset ofpatients, and rates of abnormal liver function tests,gout, and gallstones were increased with its use in thetrial.
10
4. IMPROVE IT randomized patients post-ACS with
LDL-C levels of $50 mg/dL and #125 mg/dL
(#100 mg/dL if on lipid-lowering therapy) to the
combination of simvastatin (40 mg) and ezetimibe (10mg) or simvastatin (40 mg) and placebo (simvastatinmonotherapy), with median LDL-C level at enrollmentof 69.5 mg/dL. The addition of ezetimibe reduced therelative risk of MACE by 6.4% compared with placebo.
5
Bene ﬁt was similar among patients with baseline
L D L - C5 0t o7 0m g / d Lv e r s u s $70 mg/dL.32FOURIER
(Further Cardiovascular Outcomes Research WithPCSK9 Inhibition in Subjects With Elevated Risk) andODYSSEY OUTCOMES (Evaluation of CardiovascularOutcomes After an Acute Coronary Syndrome DuringTreatment With Alirocumab) enrolled patients withLDL-C $70 mg/dL and thus did not speci ﬁcally assess
outcomes associated with adding PCSK9 inhibitor
therapy among patients with LDL-C levels 55 to70 mg/dL.
6,7However, secondary analyses of both
trials demonstrated better outcomes in patients withachieved LDL-C <50 mg/dL versus those with ach-
ieved LDL-C levels $50 mg/dL, with monotonic
relationships, suggesting b etter outcomes with pro-
gressively lower LDL-C even well below 50 mg/dL.
11,12
Rates of neurocognitive and muscle events, including
hemorrhagic stroke, were not increased amongpatients who achieved very low LDL-C levels withPCSK9 inhibition.
11,12Longer term follow-up studies
support continued bene ﬁt and safety associated with
achieving and maintaining very low LDL-C levels insecondary prevention with a PCSK9 inhibitor overseveral years.
33The bene ﬁts of ezetimibe and PCSK9
inhibitors appear to be greater among higher risk
patients with prior ACS and diabetes or moreadvanced coronary or polyvascular disease orelevated biomarkers.
20,34-41
5. Ezetimibe reduces LDL-C levels by 15% to 25% by
blocking its absorption from the gastrointestinal tractvia the Niemann-Pick C1-Like 1 protein (NPC1L1). TheIMPROVE IT trial studied the combination of simva-
statin (40 mg) and ezetimibe (10 mg) (simvastatin-TABLE 12 Statin Classi ﬁcation
Statin Classi ﬁcation by Expected LDL-C Reduction
High-Intensity
Therapy *Moderate-Intensity
Therapy †Low-Intensity
Therapy ‡
Atorvastatin
40-80 mg
Rosuvastatin
20-40 mgAtorvastatin 10-20 mg
Rosuvastatin 5-10 mg
Simvastatin 20-40 mg
Pravastatin 40-80 mg
Lovastatin 40 mg
Fluvastatin XL 80 mgFluvastatin 40 mg BID
Pitavastatin 1-4 mgSimvastatin 10 mg
Pravastatin 10-20 mg
Lovastatin 20 mg
Fluvastatin 20-40 mg
Modiﬁed with permission from Grundy et al.42Copyright 2018 American Heart Asso-
ciation, Inc., and American College of Cardiology Foundation.
*Expected LDL-C reduction $50%.
†Expected LDL-C reduction $30% to 49%.
‡Expected LDL-C reduction <30%.
BID indicates twice daily; LDL-C, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol.JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2167

ezetimibe) to simvastatin (40 mg) and placebo (sim-
vastatin monotherapy) in patients hospitalized with anACS in the past 10 days. The median time from ACS torandomization was 5 days, and 34% of patients werealready on a statin at the time of the ACS event. The
addition of ezetimibe reduced the relative risk of
MACE by 6.4% compared with placebo (hazard ratio,0.936 [95% CI, 0.89-0.99]) over a median of 6 years ’
follow-up. Ezetimibe was well-tolerated without anyclear imbalances in adverse events compared withplacebo.
5
4.6. Beta-Blocker Therapy
Synopsis
Beta blockers decrease myocardial oxygen demand by
reducing the heart rate, blood pressure, and myocardial
contractility.1,3The clinical bene ﬁt of beta blockers in
patients with left ventricular ejection fraction(LVEF) <40% and stabilized HF is well established,
including patients post-MI.
3-5Most of the RCT data per-
taining to early use of beta-blocker therapy in STEMI wereconducted in the pre-reperfusion era.
3No adequately
powered RCTs have been done that examine the clinicalbene ﬁt of beta blockers during hospitalization among
patients exclusively wit h NSTE-ACS. Although most
studies were conducted in pa tients with STEMI, early
hospital initiation of beta-blocker therapy (within 24hours) is recommended among most patients with ACSand without contraindications (eg, acute HF [Killip classII-IV], evidence of low cardiac output state or at risk forcardiogenic shock, PR interval >0.24 milliseconds, sec-
ond- or third-degree heart block without a cardiac pace-
maker, severe bradycardia, active bronchospasm).
1,2,6
Patients with an initial contraindication to beta-blocker
therapy on presentation can be reassessed after 24 hoursand initiated on oral beta-blocker therapy if the initial
contraindication has resolved. Further study is warrantedto examine the bene ﬁt in those patients with NSTE-ACS.
Although an open-label randomized trial has raisedquestions about the bene ﬁt of long-term beta-blocker
therapy following hospital discharge in patients with ACS
who have undergone coronary revascularization and havepreserved left ventricular (LV) function,
7this area re-
mains under study.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. RCTs from both the pre-reperfusion era and in the
early reperfusion era have sho wn that early initiation of
beta-blocker therapy reduces the risk of reinfarctionand ventricular arrhythmias among patients withSTEMI.
1-3The COMMIT (Clopidogrel and Metoprolol in
Myocardial Infarction) trial included 45,852 patients(approximately 50% received ﬁbrinolytic therapy and
7% having NSTE-ACS) and showed that early initiation
of high doses (ie, up to 15 mg intravenously then 200
mg orally daily) of metoprolol reduced the risk ofreinfarction an dv e n t r i c u l a r ﬁbrillation compared with
placebo but increased the risk of cardiogenic shock thatoccurred mainly during the ﬁrst 24 hours.
1In a small
open-label trial of 801 patients with STEMI who un-derwent PPCI, carvedilol did not reduce MACE over 3years, but the trial was underpowered to detect a dif-
ference.
8Overall, the weight of the evidence suggests
that a low dose of oral beta blocker should be initiatedin patients without contraindication early after diag-nosis of ACS ( <24 hours) with slow dose escalation as
b l o o dp r e s s u r ea n dh e a r tr a t ep e r m i t .U s es h o u l db ediscontinued in those with new or worsening HFsymptoms or signs of cardiogenic shock. In hemody-namically stable patients with STEMI who do not have
acute HF, intravenous beta blockers can be adminis-
tered prior to reperfusion if there are ongoing symp-toms or a clinical indication for administration. The
weight of the evidence does not support the routine useof intravenous beta blocker s prior to PPCI because of
inconsistent results as to whether it has any favorableeffect on infarct size or clinical outcomes.
9,10The
optimal duration of beta-blocker use remains unclear in
patients with preserved LVEF. Although a randomized
trial did not con ﬁrm long-term bene ﬁt from continued
use of a beta blocker after hospital discharge in lowerrisk patients with preserved LV function who had un-dergone coronary revascularization,
7additional studies
are ongoing in this space.R e c o m m e n d a t i o nf o rB e t a - B l o c k e rT h e r a p y
Referenced studies that support recommendation aresummarized in the Evidence Table .
RECOMMENDATION
1A1. In patients with ACS without
contraindications, early ( <24 hours)
initiation of oral beta-blocker therapyis recommended to reduce risk ofreinfarction and ventriculararrhythmias.
1-5Rao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372168

4.7. Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone System Inhibitors
Synopsis
Oral ACE inhibitors reduce all-cause death and MACE
in patients with STEMI or NSTEMI, particularly whenassociated with high-risk features (LVEF #40%, hyper-
tension, diabetes mellitus, or STEMI with anteriorlocation).
1-4,6Even in AMI without high-risk features,
use of an oral ACEi confers a modest survival bene ﬁt.4
Compared with ACEi, the bene ﬁts of an ARB in patients
with AMI with HF or LV systolic dysfunction aresimilar.
5Thus, in the absence of contraindications,
either an oral ACEi or ARB should be initiated inappropriate patients with AMI.
5,8In patients with AMI
with LVEF #4 0 % ,a n dw i t hH Fs y m p t o m sa n d / o rd i a -
betes mellitus, the addition of a mineralocorticoid re-
ceptor antagonist reduced all-cause death and MACE
and should be given in the absence of advancedchronic kidney disease, hyperkalemia, or othercontraindication.
In patients with symptomatic HF and reduced LVEF,
sacubitril-valsartan has been demonstrated to be superiorto an ACEi for reducing cardiovascular death or HF hos-
pitalization; however, the trial excluded patients within 3months of ACS.
9In a trial of patients early after MI with
LVEF #40% and/or pulmonary congestion, sacubitril-
valsartan did not signi ﬁcantly reduce cardiovascular
d e a t ho ri n c i d e n tH Fc o m p a r e dw i t ha nA C E i .H y p o t e n -
sive events were more common w ith sacubitril-valsartan,
but no other safety concerns were observed. Therefore, iftreatment with sacubitril-valsartan for HF with reducedejection fraction is planned, initiation of this combinationagent instead of an ACEi or ARB early after MI appearssafe.
10
Recommendation-Speci ﬁcS u p p o r t i v eT e x t
1. Randomized controlled trials have demonstrated a
reduction in all-cause death and MACE with the addi-tion of an oral ACEi in patients with AMI withLVEF#40%
1,3and in patients with anterior STEMI.2An
individual-patient meta-analysis of 98,496 patientswith AMI also showed a survival bene ﬁtw i t hA C E iu s e ,
with the greatest absolute bene ﬁt in patients with hy-
pertension, diabetes, and STEMI of anterior location.
4
In the VALIANT (Valsartan in Acute Myocardial
Infarction) trial of patien ts with AMI with LV systolic
dysfunction and/or HF symptoms, the use of an ARBwas statistically noninferior to an ACEi, and rates of all-cause death were similar between the 2 treatmentarms.
5Concomitant initiation of both an ACEi and ARB
in patients with AMI should be avoided due to an in-
crease in adverse events without added bene ﬁt
c o m p a r e dw i t he i t h e rd r u ga l o n e .5,8
2. In the EPHESUS (Eplerenon eP o s t - A c u t eM y o c a r d i a l
Infarction Heart Failure Ef ﬁcacy and Survival Study)
trial, the mineralocorticoid receptor antagonisteplerenone reduced both all-cause death and MACEduring a mean follow-up of 16 months in patientswith AMI with LVEF #40% who also had symptoms
of HF and/or diabetes mellitus. The use of evidence-
based therapies for this population was relativelyhigh, including 86% use of ACEi or ARB and 75% useof a beta blocker at enrollment.
7Patients with
advanced chronic kidney disease (serum creatinine>2.5 mg/dL) or hyperkalemia (serum potassium >5.0
mmol/L) were excluded from enrollment.
7In a trial
of 1,012 patients with acute STEMI and without a
history of HF, the use of eplerenone reduced the
primary endpoint compared with placebo, but thebene ﬁt was largely driven by a reduction in natri-
uretic peptides.
11Recommendations for Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone
System InhibitorsReferenced studies that support recommendations aresummarized in the Evidence Table .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1A1. In high-risk patients with ACS
(LVEF £40%, hypertension, dia-
betes mellitus, or STEMI with
anterior location), an oralangiotensin-converting enzymeinhibitor (ACEi) or an angiotensin
receptor blocker (ARB) is indi-
cated to reduce all-cause deathand MACE.
1-6
1 B-R2. In patients with ACS and
LVEF £40%, and with HF symp-
toms and/or diabetes mellitus, amineralocorticoid receptor
antagonist is indicated to reduce
all-cause death and MACE.
7
2a A3. In patients with ACS who are not
considered high risk, an oral ACEi
or an ARB is reasonable to reduceMACE.
4JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2169

3. The ACE Inhibitor Myocardial Infarction Collaborative
Group meta-analysis of 98,496 patients with AMI re-ported a 30-day mortality rate of 7.1% in AMI patientst r e a t e dw i t ha nA C E ic o m p a r e dw i t h7 . 6 %r e c e i v i n gplacebo (proportional reduction, 7% [95% CI, 2%-11%];
P¼0.004), and the bene ﬁt appeared to be irrespective
of baseline risk.
4The use of an ACEi also reduced
nonfatal cardiac failure compared with placebo.4
5. STEMI MANAGEMENT: REPERFUSION
STRATEGIES
5.1. Regional Systems of STEMI Care
Synopsis
The goal of optimizing outcomes after STEMI depends
not only on the ef ﬁcient execution of STEMI care pro-
cesses but also on the seamless communication andcoordination of care among the teams caring for thepatient. The goal of each community is therefore toensure a coordinated response to every patient with
STEMI, regardless of physical location at presentation, to
help minimize total ischemic time. The creation andmaintenance of successful systems of STEMI carerequire detailed mapping of care for all possible routesby which a patient with S TEMI could present fordiagnosis and receive de ﬁnitive reperfusion therapy at
both PCI-capable and non –PCI-capable facilities, as well
as access to cardiac surgical care and other advancedcare modalities ( Figure 6 ). The many stakeholders of
regional systems of STEMI care (including hospitals,
EMS companies, regional public health departments, and
local governments) must ensure that all components of aSTEMI system of care function in a coordinated waywith no gaps in care processes to help optimize STEMIoutcomes in the community.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. The establishment of coord inated regional systems
of STEMI care is associated with reduced time to
reperfusion and increased survival in STEMI inseveral pre- versus postimplementation comparisonstudies throughout the world.
1-6Over the past 15
years, considerable gains have been made inreducing FMC to reperfusion times in patients withSTEMI and these improvements in reperfusion timeshave been associated with improved outcomes.
5,7
Unfortunately, recent declines have been reported
in the rates of achieving established STEMI perfor-mance measures,
8in part due to the COVID-19
pandemic and related challenges in ensuringadequate resourcing and staf ﬁng of EMS agencies
and hospitals. Therefore , all communities should
continue to establish, reinvigorate, and maintainregional systems of STEMI care to improve outcomes
of patients with STEMI globally. The collection of
high-quality data at every stage of care is an insep-arable component of a STEMI system of care. Suc-cessful STEMI systems have robust mechanisms for:1) educating the public of the need to immediatelycall 9-1-1 (or other appropriate local emergency ser-vices) for ischemic symptoms and not driving them-selves to the nearest hospital; 2) data collection that
balances the need for adequate data capture without
introducing data overburden; 3) data sharing withinhospital departments (eg, ED and cardiology) or be-tween hospitals and EMS agencies; and 4) meetingsto review and discuss shared data at local and sys-tem levels to drive process improvement.Recommendation for Regional Systems of STEMI Care
Referenced studies that support recommendation aresummarized in the Evidence Table .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
1 B-NR1. All communities should create
and maintain regional systems of
STEMI care that coordinate pre-
hospital and hospital-basedSTEMI care processes with thegoal of reducing total ischemic
time and improving survival in
patients with STEMI.
1-6Rao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372170

FIGURE 6 Care System Pathway for Patients Experienc ing Ischemic Symptoms Suggestive of ACS
Systems of STEMI care, and the most common routes by which patients present for diagnosis and de ﬁnitive reperfusion therapy for STEMI. Best clinical practice consists
of patients calling 9-1-1 (or other emergency services) to activate EMS; EMS obtaining a prehospital ECG, activating the cardiac catheterization la boratory from the ﬁeld
for suspected STEMIs, and transporting the patient to the nearest PCI center when possible; and achieving a system goal of FMC-to-device time within 9 0 minutes.
Colors correspond to Class of Recommendation in Table 2 . *Patients with chest tightness or other symptoms indicative of a heart attack. ACS indicates acute coronary
syndromes; ED, emergency department; EMS, emergency medical services; FMC, ﬁrst medical contact; PCI, percutaneous coronary intervention; PPCI, primary
percutaneous coronary intervention; and STEMI, ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction.JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2171

5.2. Reperfusion at PCI-Capable Hospitals
5.2.1. PPCI in STEMI
Synopsis
Timely PPCI confers improved survival compared with
ﬁbrinolytic therapy as primary reperfusion therapy for
patients with STEMI.6,7Systems of care designed to
reduce the time to PPCI for patients with STEMI havebeen consequential in reducing risk of early death.19,20
T h eg o a li st op r o v i d eP P C Ia ss o o na sp o s s i b l ea f t e rt h e
diagnosis of STEMI is made with ﬁrst device activation
within 90 minutes from FMC among walk-in and EMS-transported patients and 120 minutes for transfer pa-
tients from non –PCI-capable facilities.
1-7The bene ﬁto f
PPCI begins to diminish for those >12 hours from symp-
tom onset, but there appears to be continued bene ﬁtf o r
PPCI through appro ximately 24 hours.12,13In stable
asymptomatic patients with an occluded artery >48 hours
after symptom onset, routine PCI has not been shown tobe bene ﬁcial in the absence of ongoing ischemia; the
relative utility of routine PCI for asymptomatic patients
with STEMI between 24 to 48 hours from symptom onset
is less rigorously tested.
14,15However, coronary revascu-
larization should be considered for patients with latepresentations with continued signs and symptoms ofischemia, including cardiogenic shock, acute severe HF,persistent angina, and life-threatening arrhythmias.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. PPCI is the recommended reperfusion therapy in pa-
tients with STEMI and ischemic symptoms whenperformed #90 minutes (FMC –to–ﬁrst-device activa-
tion) or #120 minutes in transfer patients to improve
survival.
1-7The success of PPCI in achieving these goals
was facilitated by the introduction in 2006 of theAHA ’s Mission: Lifeline programs involving EMS and
clinicians (eg, emergency medicine, cardiology,
nursing) with practiced drill-down programs and
regionalization of care
21that have improved myocar-
dial salvage, as well as reduced risk of death andadverse outcomes.
4,22,23PPCI is superior to ﬁbrinolytic
t h e r a p y ,w h i c hi su s e dw h e nt h ep a t i e n ti si nan o n –
PCI-capable hospital and transfer time to a PCI-capablehospital is anticipated to be >120 minutes. Compared
with ﬁbrinolytic therapy with a similar treatment
delay, PPCI offers higher rates of infarct-related artery
patency, and restoring TIMI 3 epicardial ﬂow grade, as
well as lower rates of recurrent ischemia, reinfarction,emergency repeat revascularization procedures, intra-cranial hemorrhage, and death.
6,7Radial access for
PPCI has further reduced death, decreased access sitebleeding, decreased the need for transfusion, andreduced acute kidney injury when compared with
femoral access ( Section 7.1 ,“Vascular Access Approach
for PCI ”).
24,25
2. In the SHOCK (Should We E mergently Revascularize
Occluded Coronaries for Cardiogenic Shock) trial,9re-
ported in 1999, patients with AMI and cardiogenicshock were randomized to medical therapy orRecommendations for PPCI in STEMI
Referenced studies that support recommendations aresummarized in the Evidence Table .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1A1. In patients with STEMI present-
ing<12 hours after symptom
onset, PPCI should be performedwith a goal of FMC to device
activation of £90 minutes,
or£120 minutes in patients
requiring hospital transfer, toimprove survival.
1-7
1 B-R2. In patients with ACS and cardio-
genic shock or hemodynamicinstability, emergency revascu-larization of the culprit vessel by
PCI or CABG is indicated to
improve survival, irrespective oftime from symptom onset.
8-11
2a B-NR3. In patients with STEMI present-
ing 12 to 24 hours after symptomonset, PPCI is reasonable to
improve clinical outcomes. *
12-15
2a C-LD4. In patients with STEMI present-
ing>24 hours after symptom
onset with the presence ofongoing ischemia or life-threatening arrhythmia, PPCI is
reasonable to improve clinical
outcomes. †
12,14
3: No Bene ﬁt B-R5. In patients who are stable with
STEMI who have a totallyoccluded infarct-related artery>24 hours after symptom onset
and are without evidence of
ongoing ischemia, acute severeHF, or life-threatening
arrhythmia, PPCI should not be
performed due to lack ofbene ﬁt.†
16,17
*Reproduced or †modiﬁed from the “2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Guideline for Coronary Artery
Revascularization. ”18Rao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372172

emergency revascularization. Among the patients
randomized to revascularization, 64% of patients werereferred for PCI and 36% for CABG surgery. The mediantime from randomization to revascularization was 0.9hours for PCI and 2.7 hours for CABG surgery. Despite
lack of a signi ﬁcant difference in the primary endpoint
of mortality at 30 days, emergency revascularizationwith either PCI or CABG surgery reduced mortality at 6months,
9and the mortality rate bene ﬁtw a sm a i n -
tained through 1 and 6 years.26,27In an observational
analysis from the FITT-STEMI (Feedback Interventionand Treatment Times in ST-Elevation MyocardialInfarction) trial, for every 10-minute delay in PPCI after
60 minutes from FMC, there were an additional 3 to 4
deaths per 100 with >8 0 %m o r t a l i t yb e y o n d6h o u r so f
delay from FMC for patients with cardiogenic shock.
8
Therefore, it is recommended that PPCI should beperformed in patients with STEMI and cardiogenicshock as soon as possible, ideally within 90 minutes, toreduce the mortality rate. Observational studies sug-gest that emergency CABG surgery remains a treatment
option in patients with cardiogenic shock who are not
amenable to primary reperfusion with PCI
10,11or when
PCI is not successful.11,28
3. The bene ﬁt of PCI for asymptomatic patients present-
ing 12 to 24 hours after symptom onset is not wellstudied. Small randomized trials of patients 12 to 48hours after symptom onset in STEMI have demon-strated that PPCI reduces infarct size and improves the
LVEF.
12,14These ﬁndings are further supported by
observational data.13,15
4. No dedicated trials have been done that examine the
bene ﬁt of PPCI in patients with STEMI presenting late
>24 hours after symptom onset who have clinical evi-
dence of ongoing ischemia, acute severe HF, or life-threatening arrhythmias. Observational data and
small trials suggest that PCI in patients with STEMI
with delayed presentations is reasonable and is asso-
ciated with improved outcomes.
12,14,15
5. PCI is not recommended for an occluded infarct-
related artery if the patient is asymptomatic and hasa completed infarct. MACE outcomes were similar inthose with an occluded infar ct-related artery versus
those who underwent PCI 3 to 28 days after an MI(Occluded Artery Trial [OAT])
16and results were no
different at 7 years follow-up.29Similar ﬁndings were
n o t e di nt h eD E C O P I( D e s o b s t r u c t i o nC o r o n a i r ee nPost-Infarctus) trial, which enrolled patients with anoccluded artery and Q waves on the ECG presenting 2to 15 days after symptom onset.
175.2.2. Urgent CABG Surgery
Synopsis
Trials that evaluated the ef ﬁcacy and safety of CABG
surgery in STEMI are limited.4When PCI is not possible
for anatomic reasons or in the presence of complex
disease, CABG surgery can be performed as the primary
reperfusion strategy. After successful reperfusion of theinfarct-related artery, CABG surgery can also beimportant when managing patients with more extensivenoninfarct-related artery disease ( Section 7.4.1 ,“Man-
agement of Multivessel CAD in STEMI ”). The appro-
priate timing of CABG surgery in patients with STEMIshould be determined on an individual basis, taking
into consideration the hemodynamic stability of the
patient, the presence of ongoing ischemia, and extentof myocardium at risk. After failed PPCI, emergencyCABG surgery is not recommended in the absence of alarge area of myocardium at risk or if surgical targetsare poor and if surgery may be associated with anincreased risk of death and adverse cardiovascularoutcomes compared with nonsurgical management.
5For
recommendations regarding CABG surgery in patients
presenting with cardiogenic shock or mechanical com-plications, please refer to Section 8.1 ,“Revasculariza-
tion in ACS With Cardiogenic Shock ”and Section 9.1 ,
“Mechanical Complications. ”
Recommendation-Speci ﬁcS u p p o r t i v eT e x t
1. No RCTs have been done that compare PPCI with sur-
gical revascularization in the setting of STEMI. For pa-tients with STEMI who are hemodynamically stable
with anatomy of the infarct-related artery that is not
amenable to PPCI, or if PPCI is unsuccessful, CABGRecommendation for Urgent CABG Surgery
Referenced studies that support recommendation are
summarized in the Evidence Table .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
2a B-NR1. In patients with STEMI in whom
PCI is not feasible or successful,
with a large area of myocardiumat risk, emergency or urgent
CABG surgery can be effective to
improve clinical outcomes. *
1,2
*Modi ﬁed from the “2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Guideline for Coronary Artery
Revascularization. ”3JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2173

surgery can be useful if there is a large area of
myocardium at risk. In such patients, particularly in thepresence of ongoing ischemia or if a large area ofmyocardium is at risk, CABG surgery may be effectivelyperformed as a primary reperfusion strategy or after
PPCI.
1,2D e s p i t ea ni n c r e a s ei nt h ea c u i t yo fp r e s e n t a -
tion and the burden of comorbidities, the in-hospitalmortality rate after CABG surgery in patients withSTEMI continues to decrease.
1,4
5.3. Reperfusion at Non –PCI-Capable Hospitals
Synopsis
A large proportion of patients globally live >1h o u r
driving time to a PCI-capable hospital.14-17At non –PCI-
capable hospitals, transfer for PPCI is recommended if
device activation can be rea sonably predicted to occur
in<2 hours from FMC. If this cannot be achieved andsymptoms have been present <12 hours, ﬁbrinolytic
therapy is recommended to reduce the risk of recurrentMACE. Patients with STEMI who present to a non –PCI-
capable facility $12 hours after onset of symptoms should
be transferred to a PCI-capable facility when possible.
However, if the patient has associated hemodynamic
instability or a large infarct territory at risk, they are atvery high risk for morbidity and death, and in this situa-tion where timely PPCI is not possible, the bene ﬁts of
ﬁbrinolytic administration likely outweigh the bene ﬁto f
prolonged transfer for PPCI.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. PPCI is recommended to reduce the risk of MACE when
FMC to PPCI can be achieved within 120 minutes. Apatient who presents to a non –PCI-capable hospital
with STEMI should be transferred to a PCI-capablehospital when this intervention can be accomplishedwithin 120 minutes.
1,2,18System delays related to
transfer are frequently und erestimated, and a case-by-
case approach should be calculated for each patient
with STEMI prior to transfer for PPCI.19-21
2. The use of ﬁbrinolytic therapy in STEMI in the United
States is driven by patients who are unable to receivetimely PPCI ( <120 minutes FMC to device activation).
Numerous RCTs and meta-analyses have demonstratedsuperiority to PPCI over ﬁbrinolytic therapy. However,
the bene ﬁts of PPCI versus ﬁbrinolytic therapy
diminish with increasing PCI-related time delay such
that after 120 minutes, the bene ﬁts are no longer as
clear when compared with more timely ﬁbrinolytic
therapy administration.
19In these patients, when
timely PPCI cannot be performed, meta-analyses ofRCTs and observational studies show statisticallysimilar morbidity and mortality rates for a pharmaco-invasive approach (eg, ﬁbrinolytic therapy followed
by PCI within 2 to 24 hours) when a patient does not
have timely access to PPCI.
4,5The STREAM (Strategic
Reperfusion Early After Myocardial Infarction) trial,which randomized 1,892 early presenters (symptoms<3 hours) with STEMI unable to receive PCI within 1
hour of FMC, found that both a 30-day composite(eg, death, shock, CHF, or reinfarction) and 1-yearmortality rates were similar for prehospital ﬁbrino-
lysis versus transfer for PPCI.
10,22
3. Small studies suggest that PPCI continues to offer
clinical bene ﬁt in patients 12 to 24 hours after symp-
toms onset; therefore, transfer to a PCI-capable hos-pital is reasonable.
11,12Late presenters with STEMI who
have associated hemodynamic instability or largeinfarct size are at very high risk for acute deteriorationRecommendations for Reperfusion at Non –PCI-Capable
HospitalsReferenced studies that support recommendations aresummarized in the Evidence Table .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1A1. In patients with STEMI and an
estimated time from FMC to de-
vice activation of £120 minutes or
those with a contraindication toﬁbrinolytic therapy, transfer to a
PCI-capable hospital for PPCI is
recommended to reduce MACE.
1-3
1A2. In patients with STEMI and
symptom onset of <12 hours and
anticipated delay to PPCI >120
minutes from FMC, ﬁbrinolytic
therapy should be administered
in patients without contraindica-
tion to reduce MACE.4-10
2a B-NR3. In patients with STEMI and
symptom onset of 12 to 24 hours,transfer to a PCI-capable hospitalfor PPCI is reasonable to reduce
infarct size and MACE.
11,12
3: Harm B-R4. In patients with only ST-segment
depression, except when true
posterior STEMI is suspected,
ﬁbrinolytic therapy should not be
administered due to risk of
hemorrhagic stroke and major
noncerebral bleeding.13Rao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372174

and long-term morbidity. In this situation, ﬁbrinolytic
administration may outweigh potential risks whentimely PPCI is not possible. Fibrinolysis in this settingshould be followed by transfer to a PCI-capable centeras soon as feasible.
4. There is no bene ﬁto fﬁbrinolysis and there is potential
harm (eg, hemorrhagic stroke and major noncerebral
bleeding) in administering ﬁbrinolytic therapy to pa-
tients who present with symptoms concerning for ACSwithout ST-segment elevation or suspected true pos-terior STEMI.
13
5.3.1. Timing and Choice of Agent for Fibrinolytic Therapy
Synopsis
PPCI remains the reperfusion modality of choice when
it can be rapidly achieved in a patient with STEMI. Ininstances where this is not possible or cannot be achievedin a timely manner, the bene ﬁts of coronary reperfusion
with ﬁbrinolytic therapy in patients with STEMI are well
established, with a time-dependent reduction in bothmortality and morbidity rates during the initial 12 hoursafter symptom onset, especially in those who present
early after symptom onset with low bleeding risk and
large anterior infarctions.
1-7The bene ﬁto f ﬁbrinolytic
therapy in patients who present >12 hours after symptom
onset has not been established,8-10although consider-
ation should be given to administering a ﬁbrinolytic agent
in symptomatic patients presenting >12 hours after
symptom onset of STEMI with a large area of myocardiumat risk or hemodynamic instability, if PCI is unavailable.
Fibrin-speci ﬁcﬁbrinolytic therapies are preferred over
non –ﬁbrin-speci ﬁc agents due to superior patency rates
and less immunogenicity ( Table 13 ).
11-16Tenecteplase is a
genetically engineered version of alteplase with higherspeci ﬁcity for ﬁbrin. In a large randomized trial of pa-
tients with AMI, tenecteplase and alteplase were equiva-lent for 30-day mortality rates, but tenecteplase wasassociated with reduced noncerebral bleeding.
17Reteplase (recombinant plasminogen activator) has notbeen shown to improve survival compared with alteplasein patients with MI, but its convenient bolus dosing al-lows for greater ease of use.
18Adjunctive antiplatelet and/
or anticoagulant therapies are indicated, regardless of thechoice of ﬁbrinolytic agent ( Sections 4.3.2 .,“Oral P2Y12
Inhibitors During Hospitalization, ”and 4.4,“Parenteral
Anticoagulation ”). Absolute and relative contraindica-
tions for ﬁbrinolytic therapy are listed in Table 14 .
Patients should be transferred to a PCI-capable hospital
after initiation of ﬁbrinolytic therapy for routine coronary
angiography ( Section 5.3.2 .,“Coronary Angiography and
PCI After Fibrinolytic Therapy ”). Signs of failed reperfu-
sion are discussed in Section 5.3.2 .TABLE 13 Fibrin-Speci ﬁc Fibrinolytic Agents for STEMI
Fibrinolytic Agent Dose
Tenecteplase
(TNK-tPA)Single IV weight-based bolus *
Reteplase (rPA) Two 10-unit IV boluses given 30 min apart (administered
over 2 min)
Alteplase (tPA) 90-min weight-based infusion †
Streptokinase is no longer available in the United States.
*30 mg for weight <60 kg; 35 mg for 60-69 kg; 40 mg for 70-79 kg; 45 mg for 80-89
kg; and 50 mg for $90 kg.
†Adults $67 kg: 100-mg total dosage administered as a 15-mg IV bolus, followed by
50-mg IV infused over 30 min, and then 35-mg IV infused over the next 60 min.
Adults <67 kg: 15-mg IV bolus, followed by 0.75 mg/kg IV (not to exceed 50 mg)
infused over 30 min, and then 0.5 mg/kg IV (not to exceed 35 mg) over the next 60 min.
rPA indicates reteplase plasminogen activator; TNK-tPA, tenecteplase tissue-type
plasminogen activator; and tPA, tissue-type plasminogen activator.TABLE 14Absolute and Relative Contraindications for
Fibrinolytic Therapy in STEMI *
Absolute Contraindications
nAny prior ICH
nKnown structural cerebral vascular lesion (eg, arteriovenous
malformation)
nKnown malignant intracranial ne oplasm (primary or metastatic)
nIschemic stroke within 3 mo except acute ischemic stroke †
nSuspected aortic dissection
nActive bleeding or bleeding diathesis (excluding menses)
nSigni ﬁcant closed-head or facial trauma within 3 mo
nIntracranial or intraspinal surgery within 2 mo
nSevere uncontrolled hypertension (unresponsive to therapy)
(SBP>180 mm Hg or DBP >110 mm Hg)
Relative Contraindications
nHistory of chronic, severe, poorly controlled hypertension
nSigni ﬁcant hypertension on presentation (SBP >180 mm Hg or
DBP>110 mm Hg)
nHistory of prior ischemic stroke >3m o
nDementia
nKnown intracranial pathology not co vered in absolute contraindications
nTraumatic or prolonged ( >10 min) CPR
nMajor surgery ( <3w k )
nRecent (within 2 to 4 wk) internal bleeding
nNoncompressible vascular punctures
nPregnancy
nActive peptic ulcer
nOral anticoagulant therapy
*Viewed as advisory for clinical decision-making and may not be all-inclusive or
deﬁnitive.
†Acute ischemic stroke within 4.5 h of onset.
CPR indicates cardiopulmonary resuscitation; DBP; diastolic blood pressure; ICH,
intracranial hemorrhage; SBP, systolic blood pressure; and STEMI, ST-segment elevation
myocardial infarction.JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2175

5.3.2. Coronary Angiography and PCI After Fibrinolytic Therapy
Synopsis
Failure of reperfusion and risk of reocclusion after
successful ﬁbrinolytic therapy are important limitations
ofﬁbrinolytic therapy. For this reason, all patients
receiving ﬁbrinolytic therapy should be transferred to a
PCI-capable hospital to facilitate immediate or earlycatheterization depending on the clinical circumstances.
Hospitals should have transfer protocols in place to allow
for a seamless transfer to the PCI-capable facility as soonas it is safe to do so. A detailed assessment of clinicalstatus is critical to determine the timing of angiography. Alack of improvement in ischemic symptoms, persistentST-segment elevation ( <50% resolution of ST-segment
elevation in the anterior leads or <70% in inferior leads
[measured either from the le ad with maximal baseline ST
elevation or as the sum of ST-segment deviation across
leads]),
13or hemodynamic or electrical instability can
indicate incomplete reperfusion by ﬁbrinolytic therapy.14
When there are signs of failed reperfusion, patients
should undergo immediate coronary angiography andrescue PCI. For the remaining p atients, routine coronary
angiography within 2 to 24 hours after ﬁbrinolytictherapy with coronary revascularization as needed is
recommended.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Numerous clinical trials have evaluated a strategy of
early coronary angiography with possible PCI after
ﬁbrinolytic therapy. This strategy of immediate trans-
fer and angiography has been associated with lowerrates of recurrent ischemic events as compared withusual care.
1-5Regardless of the timing of angiography,
immediate transfer enables earlier access to specializedcenters, providing critical care services and on-sitecatheterization laboratory teams that can facilitate
clinical assessments to determine the likelihood of
reperfusion and enable earlier angiography for theunstable patient.
2. Rescue PCI is associated with improved outcomes in
patients with clinical signs of failed reperfusion afterﬁbrinolytic therapy. Severa l trials have demonstrated a
t r e n dt o w a r dl o w e rm o r t a l i t ya n ds i g n i ﬁcantly lower
rates of recurrent MI and HF when rescue PCI is per-
formed for failed ﬁbrinolysis.
6,7The REACT (Rapid
Early Action for Coronary Treatment) trial6enrolled
427 patients with failed reperfusion at 90 minutes afterﬁbrinolysis to 1 of 3 treatment arms, including rescue
PCI, conservative care, or repeat ﬁbrinolytic therapy.
Rescue PCI signi ﬁcantly reduced the composite pri-
mary endpoint of death, reinfarction, stroke, or severeHF at 6 months compared with either conservative care
or repeat ﬁbrinolytic therapy. Meta-analyses also sup-
port lower rates of death or reinfarction when rescuePCI is performed in this setting.
8,9Minor and major
bleeding and rates of stroke were signi ﬁcantly higher
with rescue PCI.6-8These studies were performed in
the era of femoral artery access, with fewer options forantiplatelet and anticoagulant therapy. The use ofradial artery access
15and the elimination of the routine
use of glycoprotein IIb/ IIIa inhibitors has reduced
bleeding. For this reason, the balance of bene ﬁtf r o m
rescue PCI outweighs the risks for most patients withevidence of failed reperfusion after ﬁbrinolysis.
3. Routine early angiography with the intent to perform
PCI after ﬁbrinolysis reduces MACE in comparison to
usual care (delayed coronary angiography and/or anischemia-guided strategy of revascularization).
1-5,11,16
In these studies, >80% of patients who were trans-
ferred underwent PCI to treat a signi ﬁcant residual
stenosis or suboptimal ﬂow of the infarct-related ar-
tery. Meta-analyses of the RCTs showed a reduction inRecommendations for Coronary Angiography and PCI
After Fibrinolytic TherapyReferenced studies that support recommendations aresummarized in the Evidence Table .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1A1. In patients with STEMI, transfer
to a PCI-capable center immedi-
ately after ﬁbrinolytic therapy is
recommended.1-5
1 B-R2. In patients with STEMI with sus-
pected failed reperfusion after
ﬁbrinolytic therapy, immediate
angiography with rescue PCI isrecommended to reduce the riskof death or recurrent MI. *
6-9
1 B-R3. In patients with STEMI treated
with ﬁbrinolytic therapy, early
angiography between 2 and 24
hours with the intent to performPCI is recommended to reduce therates of death or MI. *
1-5,10,11
*Modi ﬁed from the “2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Guideline for Coronary Artery
Revascularization. ”12Rao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372176

the combined endpoint of death or reinfarction with
an early invasive approach after ﬁbrinolytic ther-
apy.10,17,18In a network meta-analysis evaluating
clinical outcomes with different modes of reperfusionfor STEMI, a pharmaco-invasive strategy (de ﬁned as
an interval between lysis and PCI $2h o u r s )w a s
associated with a 21% reduction in the mortality ratewhen compared with a strategy of ﬁbrinolysis alone.
18
Furthermore, contemporary registries have shown an
association between a pha rmaco-invasive approach
and improved outcomes compared with PPCI whentransfer times are long.
19The optimal timing of angi-
ography and PCI after ﬁbrinolytic therapy has not
been clearly de ﬁned but a similar bene ﬁti ni s c h e m i c
e n d p o i n t si se v i d e n ta c r o s st h es p e c t r u mo ft i m e sincluded in the clinical trials.
17,20Although earlier
studies raised concerns for increased bleeding withvery early catheterization (mean time, 2.2 hours),
21
more contemporary data suggest similar rates of
bleeding even if cardiac catheterization is performedvery early after ﬁbrinolytic therapy.
17,20
6. NSTE-ACS: ROUTINE INVASIVE OR SELECTIVE
INVASIVE INITIAL APPROACH
6.1. Rationale and Timing for a Routine Invasive or Selective
Invasive Approach
Synopsis
A routine invasive approach refers to a strategy of
performing coronary angiography with the intent toperform coronary revascularization by PCI or CABG (asappropriate) in patients with NSTE-ACS. This approachprovides important prognostic information, includingdelineating the extent and severity of CAD. Several RCTs
have demonstrated that a routine invasive approach in
patients with NSTE-ACS reduces the risk of MACE whencompared with a selective invasive approach.
1-3Notably,
these strategy trials were conducted in an era prior to theavailability of hs-cTn assays, routine use of radialapproach for coronary angiography, newer generationdrug-eluting stents, and contemporary evidence-basedantiplatelet therapies. Pati ents who are at prohibitively
high risk from angiography or who have known coronary
anatomy or preferences that preclude revascularization(PCI or CABG) may be managed noninvasively.
13In addi-
tion, some low-risk patients, particularly those who havenormal cardiac biomarkers a nd in whom a diagnosis of an
ACS is questioned, should be considered for a “selective
invasive ”approach that includes further noninvasive risk
strati ﬁcation prior to considera tion of coronary angiog-
raphy, because they derive less bene ﬁt from a routineRecommendations for Rationale and Timing for a
Routine Invasive or Selective Invasive ApproachReferenced studies that support recommendations aresummarized in the Evidence Table .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
Routine Invasive Versus Selective Invasive Strategy
1A1. In patients with NSTE-ACS who
are at intermediate or high risk of
ischemic events and are appro-priate candidates for revascular-ization, an invasive approach with
the intent to proceed with
revascularization isrecommended duringhospitalization to reduce
MACE. *
1-6
1A2. In patients with NSTE-ACS who
are at low risk of ischemic events,
either a routine invasive or se-lective invasive approach is rec-ommended to help identify
those who may require revascu-
larization and to reduceMACE.
1-4,7
(continued in the next column)Continued
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
Timing of Coronary Angiography for Those in Whom an Invasive
Approach Is Planned
1 C-LD3. In patients with NSTE-ACS who
have refractory angina or hemo-
dynamic or electrical instability,
an immediate invasive strategywith intent to perform revascu-larization is indicated to reduce
MACE. †
8-11
2a B-R4. In patients with NSTE-ACS who are
at high risk ‡of ischemic events, it
is reasonable to choose an earlyinvasive strategy (within24 hours) to reduce
MACE. †
8,9,11,12
2a B-R5. In patients with NSTE-ACS who
are not at high risk and are
intended for an invasive strategy,it is reasonable to perform angi-ography before hospital
discharge to reduce MACE. *
8,11
*Reproduced or †modiﬁed from the “2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Guideline for Coronary Artery
Revascularization. ”7‡Predictors of risk are outlined in Figure 8 .JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2177

invasive approach.4,7,13These low-risk patients should
still undergo noninvasive stress testing or coronary CTangiography prior to hospit al discharge. Patients with
higher risk ﬁndings on noninvasive testing or who have
recurrent ischemic symptoms should be referred forinvasive coronary angiograph y prior to hospital discharge
in the absence of contraindication ( Figure 7 ).
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. In patients with NSTE-ACS, a routine invasive
approach improves clinical outcomes, including lowerrates of recurrent MI and recurrent ischemia, comparedwith a selective invasive approach that involves
further noninvasive risk strati ﬁcation prior to consid-
eration of angiography.
1-3In a collaborative meta-
analysis of RCTs, a routine invasive approach reduceddeath or MI by 18% (OR, 0.82 [95% CI, 0.72-0.93]),including a 25% reduction in MI (OR, 0.75 [95% CI,0.65-0.88]) when compared with a selective invasiveapproach.
5The bene ﬁt was more apparent in higher
risk patients with elevated biomarkers.4The studies
that established the bene ﬁt of a routine invasive
approach were conducted in the late 1990s and early2000s, and it is unknown whether contemporaryFIGURE 7 Selection of a Routine Invasive Versus Selected Invasive Strategy in Patients With NSTE-ACS
Colors correspond to Class of Recommendation in Table 2 . *AHA Scienti ﬁc Statement on MINOCA.17CABG indicates coronary artery bypass grafting; CCTA,
cardiac CT angiography; MINOCA, myocardial infarction with nonobstructive coronary artery disease; NSTE-ACS, non –ST-segment elevation acute coronary
syndromes; and PCI, percutaneous coronary intervention.Rao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372178

therapies and advances in interventional methods
would yield different results . Similarly, elevated car-
diac biomarkers (CK-MB and older generation troponin
assays) identify those who bene ﬁt more from a routine
invasive strategy; however, it remains unknownwhether hs-cTn assays that detect smaller degrees ofmyonecrosis are as useful for identifying those whobene ﬁt from routine coronary angiography. Although
women are less likely to have obstructive coronarydisease at angiography, they derive as much bene ﬁt
from a routine invasive approach in the presence of
similar risk predictors.
4The GRACE 2.0 risk calculator
and TIMI Risk Score for unstable angina/NSTEMI mayhelp identify patients at increased risk of MACE whobene ﬁt more from a routine invasive approach
(Table 5 ).
1Relative contraindications to coronary
angiography that merit furt her consideration of the
relative risks and bene ﬁts of a routine invasive
approach are outlined in Table 15 .
2. Although some trials have demonstrated a reduction
in MACE with a routine invasive approach in NSTE-ACS,
1-3others have not demonstrated a signi ﬁcant
bene ﬁt when compared with a selective approach that
involves further risk strati ﬁcation.4,7Although a
pooled analysis of 3 randomized trials suggested thatthe bene ﬁt of a routine invasive approach was inde-
pendent of baseline risk,
6other meta-analyses across
studies have suggested that lower risk patients may
derive less bene ﬁt.4,5,14In addition, some low-risk pa-
tients, particularly those who have normal cardiacbiomarkers in whom a diagnosis of an ACS is suspect,may have improved outcomes with a selective invasiveapproach.
4,5These patients should preferentially un-
dergo noninvasive stress testing or coronary CT angi-ography prior to hospital discharge to help determine
the need for coronary angiography; however, patients
with suspected ongoing ischemic symptoms should beconsidered for coronary angiography.3. Patients with NSTE-ACS who are unstable (eg, re-
fractory or recurrent angina [despite optimal medicaltherapy, hemodynamic or electrical instability, acutepulmonary edema or HF, worsening mitral regurgita-tion]) have been largely excluded from RCTs. Despite a
relative paucity of clinical trial data, these patients are
at heightened risk of adverse outcomes, and an im-m e d i a t ei n v a s i v es t r a t e g y( <2h o u r sf r o mh o s p i t a l
admission) with intention to p erform revascularization
is recommended.
8,15If patients with ACS and unstable
features are at a non –PCI-capable hospital, they should
be immediately transferred to a PCI-capable facilitywith a goal of immediate angiography. Clinical features
that support immediate coronary angiography with
intent to revascularize are listed in Figure 8 .
4. For patients with NSTE-ACS for whom the decision has
been made to proceed with coronary angiography, thebene ﬁt of an early invasive versus a delayed invasive
approach is unclear.
8,9,11,12In the TIMACS (Timing of
Intervention in Acute Coronary Syndromes) trial,11
patients were enrolled within 24 hours of symptoms
and randomized to early angiography within 24 hours
versus delayed angiography $36 hours from time of
randomization. In the VERDICT (Very Early vs DeferredInvasive Evaluation Using Computerized Tomography)trial,
12patients were randomized to early angiography
within 12 hours versus delayed between 48 to 72 hoursfrom time of diagnosis. Both studies reported no sig-niﬁcant difference in MACE between an earlier versus
delayed invasive approach in the overall study pop-
ulations, but there was si gnal toward a reduction in
MACE with an earlier invasive approach in the higherrisk patients with a GRACE risk score >140.
11,12In a
meta-analysis of RCTs that compared an early versusdelayed approach, a mortality bene ﬁtw a sn o ts e e n
with earlier angiography. However, factors thatfavored an earlier invasive approach included a GRACE
risk score >140, diabetes, age >75 years, and elevated
cardiac biomarkers (althou gh formal tests for interac-
tion were not signi ﬁcant).
8Although not evaluated in
RCTs, a continuing steep rise in cardiac biomarkers,likely due to ongoing ischemia and myonecrosisdespite optimized medical therapy, may also favorearlier coronary angiography.
5. In intermediate- or low-risk patients for whom angi-
ography is planned in NSTE-ACS, timing does not
appear to be critical, and a delayed invasive strategywithin 48 to 72 hours does not appear to increasefuture risk of MACE.
8,10-12 ,15Randomized trial data
have not demonstrated an overall signi ﬁcant differ-
ence in death or MI between an earlier versus delayedinvasive approach in nonselected patients withNSTEMI.
8,11,12,16TABLE 15Relative Contraindications for a Routine
Invasive Approach in ACS
nHigh risk for bleeding on DAPT
nSevere thrombocytopenia (platelet count <50/C2109/L)
nAdvanced kidney disease (not on dialysis)
nAcute renal failure
nLimited ( <1-2 y) life expectancy
nAdvanced dementia
nKnown coronary anatomy that precludes PCI and/or CABG surgery
nPatient preference
ACS indicates acute coronary syndromes; CABG, coronary artery bypass grafting; DAPT,
dual antiplatelet therapy; and PCI, percutaneous coronary intervention.JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2179

7. CATHETERIZATION LABORATORY
CONSIDERATIONS IN ACS
7.1. Vascular Access Approach for PCISynopsis
The radial artery has become the preferred vascular
access site for patients undergo ing cardiac catheterization
and PCI.8,9T r a n s r a d i a la c c e s si sa s s o c i a t e dw i t hl o w e r
mortality, bleeding, and vascular complications in pa-tients treated for ACS.
5In addition, patients prefer radial
access because it allows earlier ambulation and causes
less discomfort than femoral access.9Ac a v e a ti sm o s t
trials comparing radial versus femoral access had very lowcrossover rates because they required operators withexpertise in radial access.
3T h ec h o i c eo fr a d i a la c c e s sh a s
to be weighed against the possibility that the radial arterycould be used as a bypass conduit for CABG surgery.
10In
sites where surgeons routinely utilize the radial artery as
a bypass conduit, consideration should be given on the
choice of vascular access and future use of radial arteryfor the cardiovascular surgical team. Although the radialartery is the most widely studied wrist access site, the useof alternative sites in the upper extremity, including theulnar and distal radial arteries have yielded similarFIGURE 8 Selection and Timing of an Invasive Strategy in NSTE-ACS
Figure 8 summarizes the recommendations in the 2025 ACS Guideline for a routine or selective invasive approach in NSTE-ACS. It is not meant to encompass every
patient scenario or situation, and clinicians are encouraged to use a Heart Team approach when care decisions are unclear and to see the accompanying s upportive text
for each recommendation. Colors correspond to Class of Recommendation in Table 2 . GRACE indicates Global Registry of Acute Coronary Events; HF, heart failure; NSTE-
ACS, non –ST-segment elevation acute coronary syndromes; Tn, troponin; TIMI, Thrombolysis In Myocardial Infarction; VF, ventricular ﬁbrillation; and VT, ventricular
tachycardia. Adapted with permission from Lawton et al.18Copyright 2022 American Heart Association, Inc., and American College of Cardiology Foundation.
Recommendation for Vascular Access Approach for PCI
Referenced studies that support recommendation aresummarized in the Evidence Table .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
1A1. In patients with ACS undergoing
PCI, a radial approach is preferred
to a femoral approach to reduce
bleeding, vascular complications,and death. *
1-6
*Modi ﬁed from the “2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Guideline for Coronary Artery
Revascularization. ”7Rao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372180

outcomes.11,12Transfemoral access, preferably with the
use of ultrasound guidance, should be considered in pa-tients in whom temporary MCS is planned and is thedefault alternative access site among patients in whomthe radial artery cannot be used due to clinical, anatom-
ical, or technical reasons.
13
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. RCTs have consistently demonstrated the bene ﬁto f
radial access in comparison with femoral access amongpatients treated for ACS. A meta-analysis using indi-vidual patient data from 7 high-quality RCTs (48.6%with NSTE-ACS; 46.2% with STEMI) demonstrated thatradial access was independently associated with a sig-
niﬁc a n t2 4 %a n d5 1 %r e l a t i v er i s kr e d u c t i o no fa l l - c a u s e
death and major bleeding, respectively, whencompared with femoral access.
3The magnitude of the
mortality bene ﬁt was greater among patients with
lower baseline hemoglo bin levels. The bene ﬁto fr a d i a l
access toward reducing bleeding was driven by a sig-niﬁcant reduction in access-site bleeding. Vascular
complications were signi ﬁcantly reduced by 62%. The
MATRIX trial
6demonstrated a signi ﬁcantly lower rate
of the coprimary endpoints of MACE and net adverseclinical events (composites of death, MI, and stroke at30 days, and MACE plus non-CABG major bleeding)among patients with ACS randomized to the transradialapproach compared with the transfemoral approach.This is consistent with prior meta-analyses that havereported lower mortality and bleeding with radial ac-
cess in patients with ACS.
4,14The SAFARI-STEMI
(Safety and Ef ﬁcacy of Femoral Access versus Radial
for Primary Percutaneous In tervention in ST-Elevation
Myocardial Infarction) trial showed no difference in30-day mortality rates between radial and femoral ac-cess; however, the trial stopped early and therefore wasunderpowered to detect a mortality bene ﬁt.
15
7.2. Use of Aspiration ThrombectomySynopsis
Despite restoration of coro nary patency, suboptimal
myocardial perfusion resulting from distal embolizationor microvascular obstruction is frequent and is associatedwith larger infarct size, impairment of LV function, and
excess mortality rates.
6,7Removing coronary artery
thrombus prior to balloon angioplasty, stent deployment,or both is an intuitive adjunct to PPCI that may yieldputative clinical bene ﬁts. Routine manual thrombus
aspiration performed via low pro ﬁle catheters improved
electrocardiographic and angiographic markers ofm y o c a r d i a lp e r f u s i o ni ns everal clinical studies
8,9and
reduced adverse events in a single-center trial.10,11How-
ever, subsequent trials of manual aspiration thrombec-
tomy have not demonstrated a clinical bene ﬁt.1,2,4,12,13
Similarly, results from a po oled analysis showed that
mechanical thrombectomy during STEMI was not superiorto conventional PCI alone.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁcS u p p o r t i v eT e x t
1. Results from several RCTs have shown that routine
manual aspiration thrombectomy prior to PCI does not
reduce MI size or improve clinical outcomes ascompared with PCI alone.
1,2,4,12,13In a patient-level,
pooled analysis comprising 3 RCTs, aspiration throm-
bectomy did not reduce the primary endpoint of car-diovascular death at 30 days among patients withSTEMI undergoing PPCI (n ¼18,306).
3Similarly, aspi-
ration thrombectomy did not lower risks for recurrent
MI, target vessel revascularization, stent thrombosis, or
HF at 30 days or 1 year. With respect to safety, theincidence of stroke or transient ischemic attack at30 days and 1 year was numerically higher, albeitnot statistically signi ﬁcant, among patients who
underwent aspiration thrombectomy. Reductions incardiovascular death were lower while risks for strokeor transient ischemic attack were higher among those
with a large thrombus burden treated with aspiration
thrombectomy. Dedicated studies are warranted toevaluate the role of selective aspiration thrombectomyin those high-risk patients most likely to bene ﬁtf r o m
thrombus removal prior to PCI. Manual aspiration
thrombectomy may be performed as a bailout proced-ure to remove thrombus that persists after balloonangioplasty or stent deployment, particularly with
concomitant no-re ﬂow. Estimates from RCT cohorts
indicate that 4% to 7% of patients with STEMI under-going PPCI will require bailout aspirationthrombectomy.
1,2,10Recommendation for Use of Aspiration Thrombectomy
Referenced studies that support recommendation aresummarized in the Evidence Table .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
3: No bene ﬁtA1. Among patients with STEMI un-
dergoing PPCI, manual aspiration
thrombectomy should not be
performed routinely prior to PCIgiven lack of clinical bene ﬁt.*
1-4
*Modi ﬁed from the “2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Guideline for Coronary Artery
Revascularization. ”5JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2181

7.3. Use of Intracoronary Imaging
Synopsis
Intracoronary imaging serves as a valuable tool for
guiding the placement of coronary stents, particularly incases involving the left main artery or complex lesions,resulting in greater stent expansion, less stent malap-position, and fewer coronary dissections.
1,2,4,13IVUS
provides a comprehensive view of the vessel wall,
allowing for the evaluation of plaque burden, calci ﬁca-
tion extent, lesion length, and external elastic laminadiameter before stent placement. It also facilitates theassessment of minimum stent area, malapposition,underexpansion, tissue protrusion, edge disease, andedge dissection after stent deployment.
14OCT utilizes
infrared light to produce high-resolution images of thevessel wall, offering speci ﬁca d v a n t a g e si na s s e s s i n g
calcium thickness, lipid presence, thrombus formation,
ﬁbroatheroma, and plaque rup ture, which is particularly
helpful in patients with ACS. It is also useful forexamining stent strut neointimal thickness, apposition,and edge dissections. However, it has limitationsregarding imaging depth and requires the injection ofcontrast to clear blood, limiting its utility in cases ofostial left main disease. Both IVUS and OCT play
essential roles in evaluating the necessity for lesion
preparation, choosing the appropriate stent size,reducing the likelihood of geographical errors,conﬁrming proper stent expansion, identifying compli-
cations, and determining the underlying reasons forstent failure.
14,15
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Randomized trials including patients with ACS have
shown that intracoronary imaging guidance is associ-ated with lower risk of target vessel failure (cardiacdeath, target vessel MI, or ischemia-driven targetvessel revascularization) in patients undergoing PCI.
1-4
The advantages of intracoro nary imaging are sustained
over time and can be extended to less complex lesions.5
Renovate-Complex PCI (Randomized Controlled Trial
of Intravascular Imaging Guidance versus Angiography-
Guidance on Clinical Outcomes after Complex Percu-taneous Coronary Intervention) demonstrated a sig-niﬁcant reduction in target vessel failure with
intracoronary guidance (IVUS or OCT) versus angio-graphic guidance after a median follow-up of 2.1 years.
1
The OCTOBER (Optical Coherence Tomography Opti-mized Bifurcation Event Reduction) trial showed a
signi ﬁcant reduction in target vessel failure at 2 years
with OCT versus angiographic guidance in bifurcationlesions, including left main bifurcations.
4Randomized
trials directly comparing OCT versus IVUS havedemonstrated that OCT is non inferior to IVUS for PCI-
guidance.
6-8,10However, the ILUMIEN IV: Optimal PCI
(OCT Guided Coronary Stent Implantation Comparedwith Angiography) trial, the largest trial testing the
strategy of imaging guidance with OCT, did not reveal a
difference in target vessel f ailure with OCT in high-risk
patients or patients with hi gh-risk lesions; however,
the coprimary endpoint of minimal stent area wassigni ﬁcantly larger with OCT guidance compared with
angiography guidance.
2The rates of de ﬁnite or prob-
able stent thrombosis were also signi ﬁcantly lower with
OCT-guided PCI compared with angiography-guided
PCI. A minimum stent area of <4.5 to 5.0 mm2by OCT
is considered to be an independent predictor ofMACE.
16,17Two large network meta-analyses showed
that, in aggregate, intracoronary imaging guidance( w i t he i t h e rI V U So rO C T )f o rP C Id e c r e a s e sc a r d i a cdeath, target vessel MI, target lesion revascularization,and stent thrombosis.
11,18Recommendation for Use of Intracoronary Imaging
Referenced studies that support recommendation aresummarized in the Evidence Table .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
1A1. In patients with ACS undergoing
coronary stent implantation in
left main artery or in complex
lesions, intracoronary imagingwith intravascular ultrasound(IVUS) or optical coherence to-
mography (OCT) is recommended
for procedural guidance toreduce ischemic events. *
1-11
*Adapted from the “2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Guideline for Coronary Artery
Revascularization. ”12Rao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372182

7.4. Management of Multivessel CAD in ACS
7.4.1. Management of Multivessel CAD in STEMISynopsis
Several randomized trials of hemodynamically stable
patients with STEMI have demonstrated that a strategyof multivessel PCI of signi ﬁcantly stenosed nonculprit
v e s s e l si ss a f ea n dr e d u c e sr i s ko fM A C Ew h e n
compared with PCI of the infarct-related artery alone.
1-8
These trials enrolled a select group of patients with
anatomy suitable for PCI and without clinical factorsprecluding further invasive therapies. Recent studiessuggest a lower risk of MACE (predominantly driven bya lower rate of recurrent ischemia and recurrent MI)when multivessel stenting occurs as a single procedureas opposed to when staged.
10-12The decision to proceed
with multivessel stenting and the timing of the pro-
cedure should take into account the patient ’s clinical
a n dh e m o d y n a m i cs t a t u s ,t h ed u r a t i o na n dc o m p l e x i t yof the infarct-related artery PCI, the complexity of dis-ease in the noninfarct-related artery, the amount ofmyocardium in jeopardy, and the presence of comor-bidities that might favor a conservative approach tocare. Few studies of multivessel PCI have directly
compared the ef ﬁcacy of a physiologic-guided PCI
versus an angiographic-guided PCI approach.
17,18A
meta-analysis across trials did not suggest any differ-ential bene ﬁt for complete revascularization based on
whether the approach was guided by fractional ﬂow
reserve (FFR) or angiography alone.
3
Recommendation-Speci ﬁcS u p p o r t i v eT e x t
1. Over the past decade, numerous trials have reported a
signi ﬁcant reduction in MACE with complete revas-
cularization.1,2,4-8These studies have demonstrated
bene ﬁts to complete revascularization either at the
time of PPCI2,5-8or as a staged procedure.1,2,4,6The
PRAMI (Preventive Angioplasty in Acute MyocardialInfarction) trial,
8one of the earliest trials of multi-
vessel PCI, randomized 465 patients with STEMI and
MVD to a strategy of complete revascularization
versus culprit artery only rev ascularization. The trial
was stopped early due to a signi ﬁc a n tr e d u c t i o ni nt h e
primary composite endpoint (cardiovascular death,nonfatal MI, or refractory angina) with completerevascularization, with signi ﬁcant reductions in
nonfatal MI and refractory angina and a trend inreduction in the rates of cardiovascular death. The
COMPLETE (Complete versus Culprit-Only Revascu-
larization Strategies to Trea t Multivessel Disease after
Early PCI for STEMI) trial
1randomized 4,041 patients
with STEMI and signi ﬁcant MVD to a strategy ofRecommendations for Management of Multivessel CAD in
STEMI
Referenced studies that support recommendations aresummarized in the Evidence Table .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1A1. In selected, hemodynamically
stable patients with STEMI andmultivessel disease (MVD), aftersuccessful PCI of the infarct-
related artery, PCI of signi ﬁcantly
stenosed *noninfarct-related ar-
teries is recommended to reducethe risk of death or MI and
improve angina-related quality of
life (QOL). †
1-9
2a C-EO2. In appropriate patients with
S T E M Ia n dc o m p l e xM V D ,a f t e r
successful PCI of the infarct-
related artery, elective CABGsurgery for signi ﬁcantly stenosed
noninfarct-related arteries
involving the left anteriordescending artery or left maind i s e a s ei sr e a s o n a b l et or e d u c e
the risk of cardiovascular
events. †
2b B-R3. In selected hemodynamically
stable patients with STEMI andlow-complexity MVD (those notintended for CABG surgery),
multivessel PCI of signi ﬁcantly
stenosed noninfarct-related ar-teries at the time of PPCI may bepreferred over a staged approach
to reduce the risk of cardiovas-
cular events.
10-12
3: Harm B-R4. In patients with STEMI compli-
cated by cardiogenic shock,routine PCI of a noninfarct-related artery at the time of PPCI
should not be performed
because of the higher risk ofdeath or renal failure. *
13-15
*Signi ﬁcantly stenosed refers to lesions that are severely diseased as de ﬁned by the
“2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Guideline for Coronary Artery Revascularization ”as a visually
estimated diameter stenosis severity of $70% for non –left main disease and $50% for
left main disease.16†Modiﬁed from the “2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Guideline for Coronary
Artery Revascularization. ”16JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2183

staged PCI of the non –infarct-related artery (per-
formed up to 45 days post MI) or culprit vessel –only
revascularization with PCI reserved for patients withrefractory symptoms. At a median follow-up of 3years, multivessel PCI reduced cardiovascular death
or MI and cardiovascular death, MI, or ischemia-
driven revascularization. This bene ﬁtw a sc o n s i s t e n t
across all subgroups. Angina-related QOL was alsosigni ﬁcantly improved with multivessel PCI, with a
greater proportion of patients in the completerevascularization arm who were angina-free in long-term follow-up.
9In a meta-analysis, complete revas-
cularization reduced cardi ovascular death in patients
with STEMI.19The bene ﬁts of complete revasculari-
zation with multivessel PCI should not be extrapo-lated to patients with disease more suited to CABGsurgery, because they were excluded from thesetrials.
2. The trials examining the bene ﬁto fm u l t i v e s s e lP C Ii n
patients with STEMI and MVD excluded patientsintended for CABG surgery. Furthermore, few pa-
tients with complex disease, such as chronic total
occlusions or involvement of the left main artery,were included in these trials. For this reason, thebene ﬁts of a strategy of multivessel PCI cannot be
extrapolated to patients with more complex non-infarct-related artery disease. In patients with CCDand complex CAD, including complex left main dis-ease, or in patients with diabetes who have MVD
involving the left anterior descending artery, CABG
surgery is associated with improved event-free sur-v i v a lw h e nc o m p a r e dw i t hP C I .
20-24As such, a similar
bene ﬁto fC A B Go v e rP C Im i g h tb ee x p e c t e df o rp a -
tients with STEMI and complex non –infarct-related
artery disease involving the left main or left anteriordescending artery or in patients with diabetes andMVD involving the left anterior descending artery,
who are stable and remote from their acute infarct,
although the optimal timing of CABG is unclear inthis setting and needs to take into account increasedbleeding risk from DAPT.
3. Performing multivessel PCI at the time of PPCI offers
the convenience of a single procedure, allowing forfaster recovery, without the risk of repeated arterialaccess, or the potential for recurrent ischemia before
the staged PCI. The BIOVASC (Direct Complete Versus
Staged Complete Revascularization in Patients Pre-senting With Acute Coronary Syndromes and Multi-vessel Disease) trial
10randomized 1,525 patients withACS (w40% with STEMI) and MVD to a strategy of a
single setting immediate multivessel PCI or stagedm u l t i v e s s e lP C I .A t1y e a r ,i m m e d i a t em u l t i v e s s e lP C Iwas noninferior to staged multivessel PCI for theprimary endpoint all-cause death, MI, unplanned
ischemia-driven revasculari zation, or cerebrovascular
e v e n t s .W h e nc o m p a r e dw i t hs t a g e dP C I ,as i n g l eprocedure multivessel PCI was associated with lowerrates of recurrent MI and lower rates of unplannedischemia-driven revascularization. The MULTISTARSAMI (Multivessel Immediat e Versus Staged Revascu-
larization in Acute Myocardial Infarction) study
11
compared a strategy of a single procedure multi-
v e s s e lP C Iw i t hs t a g e dm u l t i v e s s e lP C Ii n8 4 0p a -
tients with STEMI and MVD. Immediate multivesselPCI was noninferior and superior to staged multi-vessel PCI for the primary endpoint of death, rein-f a r c t i o n ,s t r o k e ,u n p l a n n e di s c h e m i a - d r i v e nrevascularization, or hospitalization for HF at 1 year.This was largely driven by a lower rate of recurrentischemia and recurrent in farction in the immediate
group. In a network meta-analysis comparing all
strategies for managing the non –infarct-related ar-
tery, a single procedure approach for immediatemultivessel PCI was preferred followed by stagedmultivessel PCI.
12Patients ideally suited for imme-
d i a t ec o m p l e t er e v a s c u l a r i z a t i o ni n c l u d et h o s ew i t huncomplicated PCI of the infarct-related artery andlow complexity noninfarct-related artery disease with
stable hemodynamics, normal LV ﬁlling pressures,
and normal renal function.
4. In patients with STEMI complicated by cardiogenic
shock and MVD, a strategy of multivessel PCI isassociated with worse outcomes.
13-15The CULPRIT-
SHOCK (Culprit Lesion Only PCI versus MultivesselPCI in Cardiogenic Shock) trial
13randomized 706 pa-
tients with AMI, approximately 60% with STEMI, and
cardiogenic shock to a strategy of complete multi-
vessel PCI or culprit vessel –only PCI. At 30 days and
1 year, the rates of death or need for renal replace-ment therapy were signi ﬁcantly higher in the group
of patients randomized to multivessel PCI.
13,14
Importantly, the CULPRIT-SHOCK trial only
permitted enrollment if there was an identi ﬁable
culprit lesion. In situations where an unstable-
appearing nonculprit artery lesion was observed, or
in those patients with an uncertain culprit lesion, thedecision to proceed with multivessel PCI may bemore nuanced.Rao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372184

7.4.2. Management of Multivessel CAD in NSTE-ACS
Synopsis
Multivessel coronary disease, de ﬁned as angiograph-
ically signi ﬁcant stenosis ( $50%) in $2 epicardial arteries,
is present in up to 40% to 70% of patients with NSTE-ACS.Identi ﬁcation of the culprit artery in these situations
might be challenging.
13Several subsets of patients,
including those with complex left main disease, complex3-vessel disease, and diabetes with left anterior
descending artery involvement, might be appropriate for
CABG surgery.
12A Heart Team approach is recommended
to consider CABG surgery versus multivessel PCI based onthe complexity of CAD, technical feasibility, patient ’s
surgical risk, and the potential for rehabilitation afterCABG surgery. Dedicated RCTs comparing multivessel PCIversus culprit-only PCI exclusively among hemodynami-cally stable patients with NSTE-ACS are lacking. A large
subgroup analysis from an RCT that included both pa-
tients with STEMI and NSTE-ACS and several observa-tional studies have suggested that multivessel PCI amongselected patients not intended for CABG reduces risk ofMACE.
1-4,6,14Angiographic assessment might over-
estimate the severity of a nonculprit lesion.15In one
study, routine integration of physiological assessment of
a nonculprit artery stenosis in NSTE-ACS led to change in
management (ie, from revascularization to medical
treatment only) in 38% of the cases.16
Recommendation-Speci ﬁcS u p p o r t i v eT e x t
1. Studies evaluating the bene ﬁt of multivessel PCI
among patients with NSTE-ACS and MVD excludedpatients planned for CABG. The potential bene ﬁto f
multivessel PCI cannot be extrapolated to patients
with complex CAD. Indeed, certain subsets of patients
might derive a survival bene ﬁt from CABG, including
those with diabetes and disease involving the leftanterior descending artery, left main with highcomplexity, MVD with complex or diffuse CAD, andthose with severe LV dysfunction ( Table 16 ).
17-20
Accordingly, a Heart Team approach is recommended
to consider CABG surgery versus multivessel PCI based
on the complexity of the CAD, technical feasibility,
patient ’s surgical risk, and the potential for rehabili-
tation after CABG surgery in these situations. In pa-tients who are deemed appr opriate for CABG, surgery
could be considered prior to hospital discharge. Severalobservational studies have suggested that early CABG(performed within 3 days of presentation) may beassociated with similar outcomes compared with
delayed CABG.
21-23
2. The FIRE (Functional Assessment in Elderly MI Pa-
tients With Multivessel Dis ease) trial enrolled 1,445
elderly patients (median age, 80 years) with multi-vessel disease (ie, nonculprit artery with minimumvessel diameter >2.5 mm and angiography estimated
stenosis 50% to 99%) and ACS ( w65% with NSTE-ACS).
Multivessel PCI reduced the risk of MACE, as well as
reduced all-cause and cardiovascular mortality. The
bene ﬁt was consistent between patients with NSTE-
A C Sv e r s u sp a t i e n t sw i t hS T E M I .
1Several observa-
tional studies and a meta-analysis of observationalstudies demonstrated that multivessel PCI is associ-ated with a lower incidence of long-term MACE.
2,3,6
Few RCTs have evaluated the optimal timing of aRecommendations for Management of Multivessel CAD in
NSTE-ACSReferenced studies that support recommendations aresummarized in the Evidence Table .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 C-EO1. In patients with NSTE-ACS with
MVD, the mode of revasculariza-
tion (CABG or multivessel PCI)
should be based on the diseasecomplexity and patient ’s
comorbidities.
Multivessel CAD and Candidates for PCI
1 B-R2. In stable patients with NSTE-ACS
with MVD but without left mainstenosis who are not intended for
CABG surgery and undergoing
culprit-lesion PCI, PCI of signi ﬁ-
cant nonculprit lesions (at the
time of the index procedure or as
a staged procedure) is recom-mended to reduce the risk ofMACE.
1-6
2b B-R3. In patients with NSTE-ACS in
whom multivessel PCI is being
considered, physiological
assessment of a nonculprit ste-nosis may be considered to guiderevascularization decisions.
7-9
3: Harm B-R4. In patients with NSTE-ACS
complicated by cardiogenic
shock, routine PCI of a nonculprit
a r t e r ya tt h et i m eo fi n d e xp r o -cedure should not be performedbecause of the higher risk of
death or kidney failure. *
10,11
*Modi ﬁed from the “2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Guideline for Coronary Artery
Revascularization. ”12JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2185

multivessel PCI approach. The SMILE (Single Staged
Versus Multistaged PCI in Multivessel NSTEMI Pa-tients) trial enrolled 584 patients and demonstratedthat multivessel PCI conducted in a single procedurereduces risk of MACE at 1 year driven by a lower risk ofrevascularization.
4The BIOVASC trial randomized
1,525 patients with ACS ( w60% with NSTE-ACS) and
showed that multivessel PCI in a single procedure was
noninferior to staged PCI with respect to MACE at1 year and without evidence of an interaction betweenpatients with NSTE-ACS versus patients withSTEMI.
5,24
3. In a secondary analysis including 328 patients with
NSTE-ACS and MVD from the FAME (Fractional FlowReserve Versus Angiography for Multivessel Evalua-
tion) trial that randomized patients to either
angiography-guided PC I (if diameter stenosis $50%) or
FFR-guided PCI (if FFR #0.80), FFR-guided PCI
reduced the number of stents and the incidence ofMACE at 2 years.
7The FRAME-AMI (Fractional Flow
Reserve vs. Angiography-Gu ided Strategy for Manage-
ment of Non-Infarction Related Artery Stenosis in Pa-tients with Acute Myocardial Infarction) trial enrolled
562 patients with ACS and MVD ( w53% with NSTE-ACS)
and were randomized to FFR-guided PCI (if FFR #0.80)
or angiography-guided PCI (diameter stenosis of>50%). FFR-guided PCI reduced the number of stents
and the risk of MACE at 3.5 years with no evidence ofinteraction between patients with NSTE-ACS and pa-tients with STEMI. Of note, the trial was prematurelyterminated due to slow recruitment and enrolled <50%
of the planned 1,292 patients.
9In the FAMOUS-NSTEMI
(Fractional Flow Reserve Versus AngiographicallyGuided Management to Optimise Outcomes in Unsta-
ble Coronary Syndromes) trial, which randomized350 patients with NSTE-ACS and MVD to FFR-guidedPCI (if FFR #0.80) or angiography-guided PCI (diam-
eter stenosis of >30%), FFR-guided PCI reduced the
number of revascularization procedures at 1 year.
8
4. In patients with NSTE-ACS complicated by cardiogenic
shock and MVD, multivessel PCI at the time of the in-dex procedure is associated with worse outcomes.
10,11
The CULPRIT-SHOCK (Culprit Lesion Only PCI versus
Multivessel PCI in Cardiogenic Shock) trial randomized706 patients with AMI and cardiogenic shock (approx-imately 40% with NSTE-ACS) to multivessel PCI at the
time of the index procedure or culprit-only PCI. Mul-
tivessel PCI was associated with higher rates of deathor need for renal replacement therapy at 30 days and at1y e a r .
10,11Notably, the CULPRIT SHOCK trial enrolled
only patients with an identi ﬁable culprit lesion. When
there is an unstable-appearing nonculprit, or uncertainculprit, artery lesion, the decision to proceed withmultivessel PCI will be based on the anatomic and
clinical circumstances.
8. CARDIOGENIC SHOCK MANAGEMENT
8.1. Revascularization in ACS With Cardiogenic ShockTABLE 16Considerations for Choice of Coronary
Revascularization Strategy for Patients WithNSTE-ACS and MVD
In patients with NSTE-ACS and MVD, CABG surgery may be preferred
over multivessel PCI in any of the following situations:
Signi ﬁcant left main coronary stenos is with high-complexity CAD
Multivessel CAD with co mplex or diffuse CAD
Diabetes mellitus and MVD wi th the involvement of the LAD
Multivessel CAD or complex left main CAD with severe left ventricular
dysfunction
Adapted from the “2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline. ”12
CAD indicates coronary artery disease; CABG, coronary artery bypass grafting; LAD,
left anterior descending artery; MVD, multivessel disease; NSTE-ACS, non –ST-segment
elevation acute coronary syndromes; and PCI, percutaneous coronary intervention.
Recommendations for Revascularization in ACS With
Cardiogenic ShockReferenced studies that support recommendations aresummarized in the Evidence Table .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-R1. In patients with ACS and cardio-
genic shock or hemodynamic
instability, emergency revascu-larization of the culprit vessel byPCI or with CABG is indicated to
improve survival, irrespective of
time from symptom onset.
1-4
3: Harm B-R2. In patients with ACS complicated
by cardiogenic shock, routine PCI
of a noninfarct-related artery at
t h et i m eo fP P C Is h o u l dn o tb eperformed because of the higher
risk of death or renal failure. *
5-7
*Modi ﬁed from the “2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Guideline for Coronary Artery
Revascularization. ”8Rao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372186

Synopsis
In patients with STEMI and hemodynamic instability,
treatment delays to PPCI are associated with worse sur-vival.
1In patients with cardiogenic shock, PCI of the
culprit vessel only is recommended.5,6Emergency CABG
is recommended in those patients in whom PCI is not
feasible.2,9Immediate revascularization with PCI or CABG
is also recommended in high-risk patients with NSTEMIwho are in cardiogenic shock.
2-5The use of MCS devices in
patients with cardiogenic shock is covered in Section 8.2 ,
“MCS in Patients With ACS and cardiogenic shock. ”
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. In the SHOCK (Should We E mergently Revascularize
Occluded Coronaries for C ardiogenic Shock) trial,2re-
ported in 1999, patients with AMI and cardiogenic shockwere randomized to medical therapy or emergencyrevascularization. Among the patients randomized torevascularization, 64% of patients were referred for PCIand 36% for CABG. The median time from randomiza-tion to revascularization was 0.9 hours for PCI and 2.7
hours for CABG. Despite lack of a signi ﬁcant difference
in the primary endpoint of mortality at 30 days, emer-gency revascularization with either PCI or CABGreduced the mortality rate at 6 months,
2and the mor-
tality bene ﬁt was maintained through 1 and 6 years.10,11
In an observational analysis from the FITT-STEMI
(Feedback Intervention and Treatment Times in ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction) trial, for every 10-
minute delay in PPCI after 6 0 minutes from FMC, there
were an additional 3 to 4 deaths per 100 with a >80%
mortality rate beyond 6 hours of delay from FMC.
1
Therefore, it is recommended that PPCI should be per-formed in patients with STEM Ia n dc a r d i o g e n i cs h o c ka s
soon as possible, ideally wi thin 90 minutes, to reduce
the mortality rate.
1,2Observational studies suggest that
emergency CABG remains a treatment option in patients
with cardiogenic shock who are not amenable to primary
reperfusion with PCI3,4or when PCI is unsuccessful.4,12
2. In patients with STEMI complicated by cardiogenic
shock and MVD, a strategy of multivessel PCI is asso-ciated with worse outcomes.
5-7The CULPRIT-SHOCK
trial5randomized 706 patients with AMI (approxi-
mately 60% with STEMI) and cardiogenic shock to astrategy of complete multive ssel PCI or culprit-only
PCI. At 30 days and 1 year, the rates of death or need for
renal replacement therapy were signi ﬁcantly higher in
the group of patients randomized to multivessel PCI.
5,6
Importantly, the CULPRIT SHOCK trial permitted
enrollment only if there was an identi ﬁable culprit
lesion. In situations where there is an unstableappearing nonculprit artery lesion, or in those patientswith an uncertain culprit, the decision to proceed with
multivessel PCI may be more nuanced.8.2. MCS in Patients With ACS and Cardiogenic Shock
Synopsis
Cardiogenic shock is estimated to occur in approxi-
m a t e l y1 0 %o fp a t i e n t sw i t hS T E M Ia n di sa s s o c i a t e dw i t han early mortality rate of 40% to 50%.
10,11Several types of
devices for temporary MCS a re available and have been
studied in patients with cardiogenic shock with variableefﬁcacy and increased risk of vascular complications.
IABP counterpulsation improves coronary perfusion andreduces cardiac afterload. It is relatively easy to use andhas a smaller insertion pro ﬁle, which is associated with
lower rates of vascular access site complications whencompared with other MCS devices.
12,13Percutaneous
microaxial ﬂow pumps unload the LV by draining blood
from the LV and pumping it to the ascending aorta. Theyare dependent on adequate right ventricular function toﬁl lt h eL Va n dr e q u i r ea d e q u a t eo x y g e n a t i o no fb l o o d .V A -
ECMO provides both blood ﬂow and oxygenation but in-
creases afterload. Randomized trials of MCS devicesremain challenging to conduct due to relative lack ofequipoise on the part of treating physicians, leading to
selective patient enrollment and limiting the generaliz-
ability of study results. Although small studies of micro-axial ﬂow pumps did not demonstrate clinical bene ﬁtf o r
patients with AMI and cardiogenic shock,
14-16aRecommendations for MCS in Patients With ACS and
Cardiogenic ShockReferenced studies that support recommendations aresummarized in the Evidence Table .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
2a B-R1. In selected *patients with STEMI
and severe or refractory cardio-genic shock, insertion of a
microaxial intravascular ﬂow
pump is reasonable to reducedeath.
1
2a B-NR2. In patients with mechanical
complication of ACS, short-term
MCS devices are reasonable forhemodynamic stabilization as a
bridge to surgery.
2-4
3: No bene ﬁt B-R3. In patients with AMI and cardio-
genic shock, the routine use of
intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP)
or venoarterial extracorporealmembrane oxygenation (VA-
ECMO) is not recommended due
to a lack of survival bene ﬁt.
5-9
*See supportive text.JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2187

randomized trial at specialized centers in Europe
demonstrated a mortality bene ﬁt with use of the micro-
axial ﬂow pump in selected patients, albeit with increased
risk of complications, including limb ischemia and renalreplacement therapy.
1Best practices for insertion of all
MCS devices, including the multimodality use of ﬂuo-
roscopy and ultrasound, shoul db eu t i l i z e dw h e nf e a s i b l e
for obtaining femoral access.17-19
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. The DanGer-SHOCK (Danish-German Cardiogenic
Shock) trial enrolled patients with STEMI and cardio-genic shock of <24 hours duration, de ﬁned as hypo-
tension (SBP <100 mm Hg or vasopressor support), end-
organ hypoperfusion (arterial lactate $2.5 mmol/L and/
or SvO
2<55% with a normal PaO 2), and LVEF <45%.
P a t i e n t sw h ow e r ec o m a t o s e( G l a s g o wC o m aS c a l escore <8) after out-of-hospit al cardiac arrest and pa-
tients with overt right ventricular failure wereexcluded.
1The study enrolled 360 patients at 14
s p e c i a l i z e dc e n t e r si nE u r o p ea n dr a n d o m i z e dt h e mt o
use of a microaxial ﬂow pump or standard of care. Use of
a microaxial ﬂow pump signi ﬁcantly reduced the risk of
all-cause mortality at 180 days by 26% (HR, 0.74 [95% CI,0.55-0.99]; P¼0.04; absolute risk reduction, 12.7%;
number needed to treat ¼8 )c o m p a r e dw i t hs t a n d a r do f
care. The absolute risk reduction seen in this trial issimilar to the absolute risk reduction in 6-month mor-tality observed with emerge ncy revascularization in
patients with AMI and LV failure in the SHOCK (Should
We Emergently Revascularize Occluded Coronaries forCardiogenic Shock) trial.
1,20However, given the
increased risks of serious complications like bleeding,limb ischemia, and renal replacement therapy with themicroaxial ﬂow pump seen in the DanGer Shock trial, the
COR is based on the balance between these risks and thereduction in death. Additionally, the timing of micro-
axial ﬂow pump placement was not dictated by the trial
protocol; thus, the preferred timing of placement isunclear. Based on these results, use of a microaxial ﬂow
pump is reasonable to reduce mortality in patients withSTEMI and cardiogenic shock who have clinical featuresconsistent with the inclusion criteria of the DanGer-SHOCK trial. In particular, patients with STEMI whopresent with SCAI shock stages C, D, or E, who are non-
comatose and have adequate p eripheral vasculature to
accommodate large-bore access are reasonable candi-dates for the microaxial ﬂow pump.
2. Although randomized trial data are lacking, MCS de-
vices can be considered as a bridge to surgery for pa-tients with mechanical complications of AMI whenadequate clinical stabilization is required and may allowfor further tissue stabilization at the injured site. A
systemic review of patients treated with MCS as a bridgeto surgical treatment of ventricular septal rupture yiel-
ded 111 studies (n ¼2,440) with almost all patients
receiving initial IABP support (n ¼2,263).
2Of the 129
patients who underwent additional MCS device place-ment (77.5% of whom were on VA-ECMO), the lowest in-
hospital mortality was observed in those treated with
VA-ECMO (29.2%) when compared with those treatedwith an IABP alone (52.0%). However, 2 database ana-lyses that were not included in the systematic reviewdemonstrated higher in-hospital death with use of VA-ECMO in patients with post-AMI mechanical complica-tions.
3,4Evaluation of the ECLS (Extracorporeal Life
Support) Organizations Regi stry yielded 158 patients
with post-AMI mechanical complications who under-
went VA-ECMO.3Survival to hospital discharge here
was low at 37.3%, and complications related to VA-ECMO use occurred in 75.3% of patients. Evaluation ofthe National Inpatient Sample yielded 10,726 patientswith post-STEMI mechanical complications, and the useof VA-ECMO was associated with increased in-hospitalmortality (OR, 2.80 [95% CI, 1.92-4.04]), while the use
of an IABP was not associated with lower mortality.
4
Both data sources included use of VA-ECMO at any
time during the hospitalization for post-AMI mechani-cal complications, including use of VA-ECMO post-surgery, a cohort at highest risk of in-hospital mortality.
3. The IABP-SHOCK II (Intraaortic Balloon Pump in
Cardiogenic Shock II) trial randomized patients withAMI and severe or refractory cardiogenic shock in whom
early revascularization was planned to IABP or no IABP.
5
At 30 days and long-term follow-up, no differences were
observed in the primary outcome of all-cause death orthe secondary biomarker or measures of disease severityendpoints.
6,7VA-ECMO has not been shown to reduce
death compared with medical therapy alone in patientswith cardiogenic shock in the setting of MI but increasesmajor bleeding and vascular complications.
21The
ECMO-CS (Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation in
the Therapy of Cardiogenic Shock) trial randomizedpatients with rapidly deterio rating or severe cardiogenic
shock to immediate or no immediate VA-ECMO.
8At 30
days, no differences were observed in the primarycomposite endpoint of all-ca use death, resuscitated
cardiac arrest, and implementation of another MCS de-vice with results consistent in the 74 patients with
cardiogenic shock related to MI and in the as-treated
analysis. The ECLS-SHOCK (Extracorporeal LifeSupport in Infarct-Related Cardiogenic Shock) trialrandomized patients with AMI and severe or refractorycardiogenic shock in whom early revascularization wasplanned to early ECLS or no ECLS.
9No differences were
observed in the primary outcome of the 30-day mortalityrate or secondary outco mes. Moderate or severe
bleeding and peripheral vascular complicationsRao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372188

requiring intervention were higher in the ECLS versus
no ECLS group. Overall, these studies do not supportroutine use of IABP and VA-ECMO in patients with AMIand cardiogenic shock.
9. ACS COMPLICATIONS
9.1. Mechanical Complications
Synopsis
Timely reperfusion therapy has reduced the incidence
of mechanical complications (ventricular septal rupture,mitral valve insuf ﬁciency due to papillary muscle infarc-
tion or rupture, or free wall rupture) after AMI
(Figure 9 ).
3,4Although occasionally found incidentally,
mechanical complications commonly present with recur-rent or refractory chest pain or a new murmur accompa-nied by disproportionate HF, cardiogenic shock, or
sudden cardiac death on clinical presentation within theﬁrst week after an AMI. Medical therapy alone is associ-
ated with high risk of early death
5,6;d eﬁnitive surgical
correction is frequently the treatment of choice.7,8Mor-
tality rates with surgery are highest in subjects with
cardiogenic shock and in those requiring early emer-gency/urgent intervention after AMI.
9,10Observed mor-
tality rates following delayed surgery ( >7 days) are lower
but patient selection and survivor bias contribute to thisobservation.
11,12The availability of temporary MCS de-
vices has led to increasing trends for delayed surgery dueto concerns for the initial degree of extensive tissue
destruction.
13,14Delayed surgical intervention may enable
hemodynamic stabilization, l ead to recovery of end-organ
injury, and promote infarct tissue healing and maturationthat could facilitate de ﬁnitive repair. Percutaneous ap-
proaches toward repair have been used in patients withprohibitive surgical risk or contraindications to surgery asa primary or temporizing opti on in the setting of acute
mitral regurgitation and ventricular septal rupture andremain an evolving area of investigation.
15,16Select pa-
tients with mechanical complications of ACS may beconsidered for cardiac transplantation or durable left
ventricular assist device as a primary or bailout treatment
strategy to improve survival.
17
Recommendation-Speci ﬁcS u p p o r t i v eT e x t
1. No RCTs evaluate the role of transfer of patients with
mechanical complications after MI to dedicated centerswith cardiac surgical expertise. Although overall surgi-cal mortality is approximately 40%, it remains the
treatment strategy of choice. Hemodynamic deteriora-
tion is unpredictable and can be precipitous in previ-ously stable subjects. Consequently, transfer to a Level 1cardiac intensive care unit (CICU)
18with access to
various temporary MCS devices and multidisciplinaryexperienced teams of surgical, interventional, HF, andpalliative care specialists is recommended. Emergingdata following the creation of shock teams supports the
transfer of hemodynamically unstable patients from
community hospitals to centers with multidisciplinaryexpertise.
19,20Although the exact timing remains un-
certain, early corrective surgery is the treatment ofchoice for mechanical complications of MI.
7,8,12The risk
of surgical correction is highest when performed in thesetting of cardiogenic shock
9,21,22and appears lower
when surgery is delayed. The early hazard with surgery
is attributed to patient acuity, end-organ injury, and
lack of tissue integrity to promote de ﬁnitive and lasting
repair. Selected subjects may be candidates for eitherdeﬁnitive or temporizing percutaneous structural
intervention as a bridge to de ﬁnitive surgical interven-
tion.
15,16,23Given the complexity of decision making, a
Heart Team approach to guide feasibility, timing, andnature of corrective intervention as well as the need and
selection of MCS support is recommended as soon as a
mechanical complication is diagnosed.
2. No RCTs have evaluated the role of MCS in improving
clinical outcomes in the se tting of mechanical compli-
c a t i o n s .T h ec h o i c eo fs p e c i ﬁc MCS should be individ-
ualized and guided by patient characteristics, nature ofthe mechanical complication, and the hemodynamicproﬁle. In patients with ventricular septal rupture, the
use of an IABP has been shown to reduce left-to-right
shunting and improve hemodynamics in patients withand without shock.
24Favorable hemodynamic effects
with IABP are also noted with acute ischemic mitralregurgitation. Various devices have been utilized whenIABP fails or if hemodynamic instability remains pro-found.
1The use of MCS devices has enhanced hemo-
dynamic stabilization to allow the opportunity for
consideration of delayed corrective strategy.13,14Recommendations for Mec hanical Complications
Referenced studies that support recommendations aresummarized in the Evidence Table .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 C-EO1. Patients with a mechanical
complication of ACS should bemanaged in a facility with cardiacsurgical expertise.
2a B-NR2. In patients with a mechanical
complication of ACS, short-termMCS devices are reasonable forhemodynamic stabilization as a
bridge to surgery.
1-3JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2189

9.2. Electrical Complications and Prevention of Sudden Cardiac
Death After ACSFIGURE 9 Clinical Characteristics of Mechanical Complications of Acute Myocardial Infarction
Contained rupture is the preferred term for an entity sometimes referred to as pseudoaneurysm. HF indicates heart failure; LA, left atrium; LV, left v entricle; and MR,
mitral regurgitation. Modi ﬁed with permission from Damluji et al.25Copyright 2025 Devon Medical Art.
Recommendations for Electrical Complications and
Prevention of Sudden Cardiac Death After ACSReferenced studies that support recommendations aresummarized in the Evidence Table .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
Ventricular Arrhythmias
1A1. In patients post MI, implantable
cardioverter-de ﬁbrillator (ICD)
implantation is recommended in
selected patients with anLVEF £40% ( Table 17 ) at least 40
days post MI and at least 90 days
postrevascularization to reducedeath. *
1-4
2a C-EO2. In patients post ACS, ICD implan-
tation is reasonable in patients withclinically relevant ventricular
arrhythmias >48 hours and within
40 days post MI to improvesurvival. *
5,6
(continued in the next column)Continued
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
2b B-R3. In patients early after MI, use-
fulness of a temporary wearablecardioverter-de ﬁbrillator is un-
certain in patients with an
LVEF £35% to improve survival.
7
Bradyarrhythmias
1 B-NR4. In patients presenting with an AMI
with sustained evidence of second-
degree Mobitz type II atrioventric-
ular block, high-grade atrioven-tricular block, alternating bundle-
branch block, or third-degree
atrioventricular block (persistentor infranodal), permanent pacing isindicated. †
8,9
*Adapted from the “2017 AHA/ACC/HRS Guideline for Management of Patients With
Ventricular Arrhythmias and the Prevention of Sudden Cardiac Death. ”†Adapted from
the“2018 ACC/AHA/HRS Guideline on the Evaluation and Management of Patients With
Bradycardia and Cardiac Conduction Delay. ”Rao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372190

Synopsis
Electrical complications in patients with ACS may
create challenges in clinical management due to consid-eration for the need of antico agulant therapy in patients
who develop atrial ﬁbrillation (AF) or ﬂutter and possible
need for antiarrhythmic therapy and electrophysiologic
interventions. Many of these considerations have beenaddressed in depth in separate guideline documents.
10
Generally, arrhythmic complications increase bothmorbidity and mortality rates in patients after ACS. Pa-tients who present with AMI with reduced LVEF ( #40%)
have increased risk of new-onset AF, bradyarrhythmias,and ventricular arrhythmias.
11,12This risk appears to be
increased in those patients wh o are not revascularized or
receive ﬁbrinolytic therapy compared with those who
undergo PCI.11
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Ventricular arrhythmia sa r ec o m m o na f t e rA C Sa n d
more common in patients with reduced LVEF. MADIT
II (Multicenter Automatic De ﬁbrillator Implantation
Trial) demonstrated a 31% reduction in all-causemortality (HR, 0.69 [95% CI, 0.51-0.93]) for prophy-lactic implantation of a cardiac de ﬁbrillator in patients
with an LVEF #30% who were at least 30 days after MI
or 3 months after revascularization for MI and had ananticipated life expectancy longer than 1 year.
2A
mortality bene ﬁt for prophylactic ICD implantation has
also been shown in patients with an LVEF #35% and
New York Heart Association class II or III HF symp-toms,
1,3as well as in patients with inducible ventricu-
lar tachycardia or ventricular ﬁbrillation and an
LVEF#40%1,4,13(Table 17 ).
2. The risk of ventricular arrythmias and sudden cardiac
d e a t hi sh i g h e s te a r l ya f t e rM I ,a l t h o u g ht h er o u t i n eimplantation of a de ﬁbrillator (for primary prevention)
in patients with LV dysfunction early after MI or CABG
has not been associated with improved survival.
14-16In
DINAMIT (De ﬁbrillator in Acute Myocardial Infarction
Trial), ICD implantation led to a 58% reduction inarrhythmic deaths within 6 to 40 days post MI withejection fraction #35%; however, this was offset by an
increase in nonarrhythmic deaths.
16Sustained epi-
sodes of ventricular tachycardia or ventricular ﬁbrilla-
tion occurring >48 hours after reperfusion are
associated with an incr eased risk of death,12,17and the
risk of sudden cardiac death is highest in the ﬁrst
month.5Patients with ventricular arrhythmias should
ﬁrst be managed with beta blockers and/or antiar-
rhythmic therapy. The bene ﬁt of ICD implantation in
patients with persistent or sustained ventricular ar-rhythmias and who are <40 days post MI remains un-
clear.
15,16,18A single-center observational studyenrolled patients post STEMI (median, 9 days) and
referred those with an LVEF #40% for electrophysio-
l o g i ct e s t i n ga n di m p l a n t e da nI C Do n l yi nt h o s ew i t hinducible ventricular tachycardia. Although a ran-domized comparator arm was unavailable, 22% of
those who underwent ICD implantation had ventricu-
lar tachycardia terminated by the device during theﬁrst 12 months.
6The effects of ICD implantation on
mortality cannot be de ﬁnitely ascertained, and more
research is required. Radiofrequency catheter ablationshould be considered in patients with recurrent ven-tricular tachycardia or ventricular ﬁbrillation followed
by ICD implantation.
19Earlier ICD implantation can be
considered in patients who have an indication for a
permanent pacemaker prior to hospital discharge andin whom LVEF is not expected to recover, but no evi-dence was observed to de ﬁnitively demonstrate the
safety of this approach.
10,20
3. In the VEST (Vest Prevention of Early Sudden Death)
t r i a l ,t h er o u t i n eu s eo fat e m p o r a r yw e a r a b l ecardioverter-de ﬁbrillator did not signi ﬁcantly reduce
the primary endpoint (composite of sudden death or
death from ventricular tachyarrhythmias at 90 days) inpatients with AMI and LVEF #35% (relative risk, 0.67
[95% CI, 0.37-1.21]).
7,21The secondary endpoint of
death from any cause was lower in the wearable vestgroup compared with the no-device group (relativerisk, 0.64 [95% CI, 0.43-0.98]); only 12 of 48 patientswere wearing the device at the time of death.
7Greater
bene ﬁt was demonstrated in those who were compliant
with the device.21As such, use of a wearable
cardioverter-de ﬁbrillator could be considered in high-
risk patients with reduced LVEF as a bridge toconsideration for the need for an ICD.
4. Patients with STEMI with second- or third-degree
atrioventricular block have higher in-hospital mortal-ity than those without high-degree atrioventricular
block.
22,23Patients who present with ACS with com-
p l e t eh e a r tb l o c kh a v eah i g h e ri n c i d e n c eo fc a r d i o -genic shock, ventricular arrhythmia, and death.
24,25In
a contemporary cohort of patients with AMI, theTABLE 17LVEF and Patient Characteristics De ﬁning an
Indication for Prophylactic ICD Implantation forPrimary Prevention in Ischemic Heart Disease
LVEFPatient Category: All Patients Should
Have Expected Survival of $1y
#30% NYHA class I, II, or III2
31%-35% NYHA class II or III1,3
#40% Inducible VT1,4,13
ICD indicates implantable cardioverter-de ﬁbrillator; LVEF, left ventricular ejection
fraction; NYHA, New York Heart Association; and VT, ventricular tachycardia.JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2191

incidence of high-degree atrioventricular block has
decreased from 4.2% to 2.1%; however, increasedmorbidity and mortality remain despite reperfusiontherapy in those with high-degree atrioventricularblock.
26,27A pooled analysis of 30,000 patients found
that high-degree atrioventricular block, asystole, and
electromechanical dissociation are infrequent compli-cations of NSTEMI but are associated with increasedshort-term mortality. High-degree atrioventricularblock is not considered to be responsible for theincreased mortality but is a surrogate marker of larger
infarct size.
28Temporary pacemaker insertion in the
setting of ACS in patients with high-degree atrioven-
tricular block and other pacer indications has been
found to improve postdischarge survival.8,9,29Perma-
nent pacemaker insertion is recommended with unre-solved high-degree atrioventricular block that persists>72 hours.
20
9.3. Pericarditis Management After MI
Synopsis
The diagnostic criteria for post-MI pericarditis are dis-
played in Table 18 . Pericarditis that occurs early after MI
typically arises 1 to 3 days after a transmural event and is
presumed to be in ﬂammatory in nature due to adjacent
myocardial necrosis. These cases of early pericarditis aretypically transient, lasting several days, and will resolvewith conservative therapy. Acetaminophen can be given
for symptomatic relief. A second form of pericarditis mayoccur weeks after MI (Dressler ’ss y n d r o m e )a n di s
believed to be immune-mediated as a response to peri-
cardial irritation or damage, such as in the setting of any
degree of hemopericardium.
1,2These cases of late peri-
carditis often require additional therapy ( Table 19 ). Given
the rarity of post-MI pericarditis (0.1%-0.5%) in the era ofearly coronary reperfusion therapy,
3dedicated RCTs of
h i g h - d o s ea s p i r i na r el a c k i n g ,a n dd a t aa r ee x t r a p o l a t e dfrom studies of the heterogeneous diagnosis of acutepericarditis.
4Furthermore, RCTs of colchicine were per-
formed on a background of high-dose aspirin therapy.5-7If
symptoms persist despite standard supportive therapy inearly pericarditis and in any l ate pericarditis, high-dose
aspirin may be used to reduce symptoms.
4The use of
colchicine should also be considered to reduce symptomsand decrease risk of recurrence
8,9; suggested dosing is
summarized in Table 19 . The value of a loading dose of
colchicine in this setting is unclear. Routine use of high-
dose aspirin or colchicine is not indicated for the man-
agement of asymptomatic pericardial effusions.10,11Glu-
cocorticoids and nonsteroidal anti-in ﬂammatory drugs
(other than aspirin) are potentially harmful due topossible increase in risk of recurrent MI or impairedmyocardial healing and risk of rupture.
12,139.4. Management of LV Thrombus After MI
Synopsis
LV thrombus typically occurs in the setting of large
anterior STEMI and can lead to thromboembolic compli-
cations, including stroke and systemic embolization. In
the era of PCI, the incidence of LV thrombus after ACS hasdecreased and is estimated to be <5% to 10% in the post-
MI population.
1-3Limited RCT data are available on the
contemporary management of LV thrombus, and currentmanagement is based mostly on retrospective andobservational data and expert consensus. Patients athighest risk for LV thrombus include those with anterior
STEMI involving the left anterior descending artery,
LVEF <30% (especially in the presence of an LV aneu-
rysm), and longer times to reperfusion. An echocardio-gram is the recommended imaging modality for diagnosis,given its wide accessibility and low cost.
4Cardiac MRI is
more sensitive for detection of LV thrombus and may beconsidered when there is high clinical suspicion andechocardiogram results are inconclusive. LV thrombus
may form later during hospitalization or after discharge;
therefore, repeat imaging can sometimes detect LVthrombus in high-risk patients.
5Because DAPT is recom-
mended for most patients early after ACS, the addition ofan anticoagulant for LV thrombus needs to be consideredin the context of the patient ’s overall bleeding risk versus
their risk of an embolic event. Most patients with LVthrombus will warrant anticoagulation for a period of 3
months, at which time the presence of residual thrombus
can be assessed by repeat imaging to help determinewhether a more prolonged course is warranted.
1Although
direct oral anticoagulants (DOAC) are routinely used inTABLE 18 Clinical Criteria for Diagnosis of Pericarditis
Diagnosis Is Made With Presence of Pleuritic Chest Pain and ‡1 of the Following
Criteria:
nFriction pericardial rub on auscultation
nElectrocardiographic evidence such as classic PR-segment depression or
diffusive concave ST-segment elevations, or in the setting of MI,
persistent ST-segment elevations or dynamic T-wave changes
nNew or growing pericardial effusion on echocardiography
MI indicates myocardial infarction.
TABLE 19Additional Therapy for Persistent/Late
Pericarditis Symptoms
Medical Therapy Dosing Schedule
High-dose aspirin 500-1,000 mg every 6-8 h until symptoms improveColchicine 0.5-0.6 mg once *or twice daily for 3 mo
*Daily dosing should be used in patients who weigh <70 kg and further adjusted in
patients with stage 4-5 kidney disease, severe hepatic impairment, or with concomitant
P-glycoprotein and/or moderate and severe CYP3A4 inhibitors.Rao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372192

clinical practice, there are limited data comparing the
efﬁcacy of a DOAC versus vitamin K antagonist in the
setting of LV thrombus. Observational studies and smallRCTs have suggested that DOAC may be noninferior tovitamin K antagonist with respect to mortality, stroke, or
LV thrombus resolution, and DOACs may offer an
improved bleeding pro ﬁle.
6The practical management of
LV thrombi is more completely addressed in otherdocuments.
1,6
10. IN-HOSPITAL ISSUES IN THE MANAGEMENT
OF ACS
10.1. Cardiac Intensive Care Unit
Synopsis
The nurse-to-patient ratio in the CICU should be suf ﬁ-
cient to provide (1) continuous electrocardiographic
rhythm monitoring, (2) frequent assessment of vital signs
and mental status, and (3) ab ility to perform rapid car-
dioversion and de ﬁbrillation for arrhythmias.1,2Some
hospitals may not have a dedicated CICU but rather carefor patients with MI within a general multipurpose ICU;this approach requires trained providers with suf ﬁcient
expertise in the care of cardiac patients.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Admission to the CICU and optimal length of stay in the
CICU after an MI should be based on patients ’risk
proﬁles and clinical stability, while considering the
patient ’s baseline cardiac risk and comorbidities. Pa-
tients with ACS with continuing/ongoing angina, he-
modynamic instability, uncontrolled arrhythmias, or a
large MI with HF, cardiogenic shock, or both, should beadmitted to a CICU.
1,2Patients with ongoing ischemic
symptoms should be preferent ially triaged for cardiac
catheterization whenever possible. Stable patients withACS and without recurrent ischemia, signi ﬁcant ar-
rhythmias, pulmonary edema, or hemodynamic insta-bility do not need CICU admission and can be admittedto an intermediate care or telemetry unit. Clinical pre-dictors may be useful for hel ping identify patients who
will require CICU care. For example, the ACTION ICU
risk score for CICU admission integrates 9 variables onpresentation to the ED including: signs or symptoms ofH F ,i n i t i a lh e a r tr a t e ,i n i t i a lS B P ,i n i t i a lt r o p o n i n ,i n i t i a lserum creatinine, prior revascularization, chronic lungdisease, ST-segment depression, and age >70 years.
3
10.2. Management of Anemia in ACS
Synopsis
Anemia is common in patients with ACS and is associ-
ated with worse short- and long-term outcomes.2-4Ane-
mia is associated with adverse outcomes irrespective ofwhether the anemia is chronic and due to comorbid con-
ditions, or acute and the result of bleeding related to
antithrombotic therapy and/o r invasive procedures. The
adverse effects of anemia may be due to decreasedmyocardial oxygen delivery, increased myocardial oxy-gen demand due to increased cardiac output, or theavoidance of potentially bene ﬁcial antithrombotic drugs
and/or procedures. In observational studies, bloodtransfusion has been associated with worse clinical out-
comes.
5-8Randomized trials in medically ill patients and
those undergoing cardiac surgery have demonstrateds i m i l a ro rb e t t e ro u t c o m e sw i t har e s t r i c t i v et r a n s f u s i o nstrategy (targeting a blood hemoglobin level around8 g/dL) than with a liberal transfusion strategy (targetinga blood hemoglobin level around 10 g/dL).
9-11However,
randomized trial evidence for populations with ACS sug-gests possible clinical bene ﬁtf o ram o r el i b e r a lRecommendation for CICU
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
1 C-EO1. Patients with ACS and with
ongoing angina, hemodynamic
instability, uncontrolled arrhyth-mias, suboptimal reperfusion, orcardiogenic shock should be
admitted to a CICU to reduce
cardiovascular events.Recommendation for Management of Anemia in ACS
Referenced studies that support recommendation aresummarized in the Evidence Table .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
2b B-R1. In patients with ACS and acute or
chronic anemia, blood trans-
fusion to achieve a hemoglobinlevel ‡10 g/dL may be reasonable
to reduce cardiovascular events.
1JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2193

transfusion strategy targeting a hemoglobin level above
10 g/dL compared with targeting a hemoglobin levelabove 7 g/dL to 8 g/dL.
1,12,13
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. The MINT (Myocardial Ischemia and Transfusion) trial
randomly assigned 3,504 pat ients with acute STEMI or
NSTEMI and anemia with a blood hemoglobin levelof<10 g/dL (13% with recent bleeding) to a restrictive
transfusion strategy (transfusing if the hemoglobinlevel was <7-8 g/dL) or a liberal transfusion strategy
(transfusing if the hemoglobin level was <10 g/dL).
1
Patients were ineligible for enrollment if they had un-
controlled bleeding, were r eceiving palliative treat-
ment, or were scheduled to have cardiac surgery.Transfusion could be delaye d for patients with volume
overload or until day of dialysis in patients with end-s t a g er e n a ld i s e a s e .T h ep r i m a r yo u t c o m eo f3 0 - d a ydeath or recurrent MI occurred in 16.9% of patients in
the restrictive strategy and 14.5% of patients in the
liberal strategy (relative risk, 1.15 [95% CI, 0.99-1.34];P¼0.07). Death occurred in 9.9% of patients in the
restrictive strategy and 8.3% of patients in the liberalstrategy (relative risk, 1.19 [95% CI, 0.94-1.49]), andcardiac death occurred in 5.5% of patients in therestrictive strategy and 3.2% of patients in the liberalstrategy (relative risk, 1.74 [95% CI, 1.26-2.40]).
Although the MINT trial did not demonstrate a statis-
tically signi ﬁcant reduction in its primary endpoint, the
results suggest that a liberal blood transfusion strategytargeting a hemoglobin level around 10 g/dL may pro-vide short-term clinical bene ﬁt over a restrictive
transfusion strategy targeting a hemoglobin level above7 g/dL or 8 g/dL in patients with AMI and anemia.
10.3. Telemetry and Length of StaySynopsis
Advances in vascular access methods, coronary revas-
cularization, and concomitant medical therapies havecontributed to shortening length of stay and furtherfacilitated changes in discharge patterns after PCI in the
setting of ACS. There remains limited evidence regarding
the optimal length of stay after MI. Patients with STEMIrepresent a higher risk cohort who may require longerlength of stay. Available data suggest that an earlydischarge strategy of <3 days from admission is not
associated with increased mortality for low-risk patientsafter STEMI who have undergone PCI.
3-8T h eZ w o l l es c o r e
has been recommended as a clinical tool to help identify
patients after PPCI in STEMI at low risk of death (low-risk
patients, score #3) who can potentially be discharged
earlier from the hospital (48 to 72 hours). Predictors ofmortality in the Zwolle score include age, Killip class,postprocedural TIMI Flow Grade, 3-vessel disease, ante-rior infarction, and ischemic time.
3Optimal length of stay
in the setting of NSTE-ACS has been less rigorouslystudied. Small retrospective studies have suggested
safety of very early or same-day discharge after PCI for
patients with ACS, with most (71%) of same-day dischargebeing troponin-negative.
9Patients being considered for
early discharge should be clinically stable without evi-dence of ongoing ischemia, acute kidney injury, LVdysfunction, HF, and procedural complications and withadequate postdischarge support.
8Hospitals and care
providers should ensure that patients have access to
postdischarge prescriptio n medications and adequate
follow-up.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. The number of studies addressing telemetry duration
are few and the focus has been on arrhythmia moni-toring, not continuous ST-segment monitoring.Continuous ST-segment monitoring can be considered
for higher-risk patients, including those with suspected
ischemia who are not yet revascularized.
1,10-14Patients
with ACS who are at low risk for cardiac arrhythmiasrequire rhythm monitoring for #24 hours or until cor-
onary revascularization (whichever comes ﬁrst) in a
telemetry unit, while individuals at intermediate tohigh risk for cardiac arrh ythmia may require rhythm
monitoring for >24 hours in a telemetry unit or in an
intermediate care unit, depe nding on the clinical pre-
sentation, degree of revascularization, and earlyRecommendation for Telemetry and Length of Stay
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
1 C-LD1. In patients with ACS, telemetry
monitoring is recommended to
reduce cardiovascular events
with duration determined bycardiac risk.
1,2Rao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372194

postrevascularization course with input from the
treating cardiologist.10,12-14
10.4. Noninvasive Diagnostic Testing Prior to
Hospital Discharge
Synopsis
In patients with ACS, LV function should be routinely
evaluated in patients prior to hospital discharge to helpguide therapy and for risk strati ﬁcation.
1-3Transthoracic
echocardiography is generally the preferred modalitybecause it is noninvasive and can provide a comprehen-sive assessment of ventricular and valvular function, as
well as possibly detect LV thrombus or mechanical
complications. Transthoracic echocardiography is there-fore strongly preferred for all patients hospitalized withSTEMI because complications may be more likely to bepresent. In patients where transthoracic echocardiogra-phy is nondiagnostic, cardiac magnetic resonance imag-ing is a reasonable alternative i n clinically stable patients.
Alternatively, LV function and some mechanical compli-
cations can be assessed invasively with left ventriculog-
raphy in the cardiac catheteri zation laboratory, but other
data regarding valvular funct ion and wall motion are best
evaluated with noninvasive methods like transthoracicechocardiography or cardiac magnetic resonance imaging.LV function may also be estimated noninvasively bymyocardial perfusion imaging testing, but this will alsoprovide incomplete information regarding the presence or
absence of other complications of MI. For patients in
whom LV function is found to be reduced, a repeatechocardiogram should be performed in 6 to 12 weeks tofurther guide treatment decisions and for consideration ofneed for an ICD.
4,5Recommendation-Speci ﬁcS u p p o r t i v eT e x t
1. LV function should be routinely evaluated in patients
with ACS prior to hospital discharge because LVEFguides therapeutic interventions and facilitates riskstrati ﬁcation. The diagnosis of LV dysfunction is
important because it may trigger consideration for theinitiation or optimization of guideline-directed thera-peutic interventions for patients with HF or depressedLV function. It also helps identify patients with
reduced LVEF who may require consideration for
future primary prevention implantation of an ICD. Be-sides LVEF, transthoracic echocardiography facilitatesthe assessment of regional w all motion abnormalities,
valvular function, mechanical complications,
4and LV
thrombus.5In cases in which LV function cannot be
adequately assessed despite the use of contrast echo-cardiography, cardiac magnetic resonance is the
preferred imaging modality for clinically stable pa-
tients.
6-9
10.5. Discharge Planning
10.5.1. Patient Education
Synopsis
Patient education is universally valued and aims to
deliver information from clinicians to patients to
improve health behavior and long-term health-relatedoutcomes. Clinicia n sa r ew e l lp o s i t i o n e dt oe n g a g ei n
meaningful dialogue with patients who have experi-enced an ACS event about secondary preventionand building self-care skills to manage their condition(Table 20 ). Recovery represents a teachable moment to
provide structured educatio n, including priming the pa-
tient to attend cardiac rehabilitation (CR). Systematic
reviews of educational interv entions targeting secondary
prevention in patients with co ronary heart disease, many
of whom have ACS, have demonstrated effectiveness inimproving disease-related knowledge, healthy behaviors(eg, smoking cessation, physical activity, healthy dietarybehavior), and medication adherence.
1-3The magnitude
of the effect on each of these outcomes varies by study.
Beyond improved knowledge and behavior change, the
impact of individualized education for patients with ACSon morbidity and mortality is less clear. A shortcomingof published educational intervention studies to date isthat the interventions are markedly heterogeneous butvary in intensity, duration, delivery mode, resourcesneeded, and outcomes measured. Currently, insuf ﬁcientRecommendation for Noninvasive Diagnostic Testing
Prior to Hospital Discharge
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
1 C-LD1. In patients with ACS, an assess-
ment of LVEF is recommendedprior to hospital discharge to
guide therapy and for risk strati-
ﬁcation.
1-3JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2195

comparative data are available to guide clinicians about
which speci ﬁc educational interven tions are best. How-
ever, evidence supports the use of individualized goal
setting that demonstrates respect for the patient andtheir circumstances, structu red content that is culturally
appropriate, and clearly de ﬁned outcomes.
4Table 20
lists the components that should be discussed with ACSpatients at the time of hospital discharge.
10.5.2. Postdischarge Follow-Up and Systems of Care
Coordination
Synopsis
Transition from the hospital to home is a critical period
for patients with ACS because approximately 1 in 5 pa-tients are readmitted within 30 days of discharge.
1-6
Women, individuals from tradi tionally underrepresented
racial and ethnic groups, and patients who require ICU
services during their index hosp italization are particularly
at risk for readmission.3Quality improvement programs
such as the Hospital to Home Initiative7or the AMI
Toolkit8provide resources to assist clinicians decrease
readmission rates and improve medication and CRadherence through increase d provider communication
and care coordination. Transitional care interventionsthat leverage different typ es of support (eg, hospital-
initiated support, patient and family education deliv-
ered before and after discharge, or community-based orchronic disease management models of care) are exam-ples of ways to reduce risk of readmission.
9Hospital-
initiated support interventions are associated withreduced mortality rates at 3 months and 1 year as well as areduction in 30-day readmission rates among patientswith AMI.
9,10Multicomponent integrated care ( $2q u a l i t y
improvement strategies targeting different domains ofthe health care system, health care professionals, or pa-tients) as compared with usual care has been associated
with reduction of all-cause death, cardiovascular mortal-
ity, and all-cause hospitalization.
11Emerging digital
health interventions hold promise to improve the transi-tion from hospital to home. For additional recommenda-tions on nutrition, physical activity, smoking cessation,and alcohol and substance use, refer to the “2023 AHA/
ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Guideline for Management
of Patients With Chronic Coronary Disease. ”
12Table 21
summarizes the recommended guidance for hospital
discharge.TABLE 21 Guidance for ACS Discharge: Best Practices
Communication nPatient centered, verbally and in writing in pa-
tient/caregiver preferred language
nShared decision-making regarding assessment of
goals and preferences should be discussed with
patient/caregiver
Clinical assessment nAddress comorbidities and risk factors for recur-
rent events
nAssess for presence of ongoing ischemic symp-toms, using standardized instrument ideally
embedded into EHR
nAssess risk for bleeding related to medications or
procedural site
nAssess need for additional testing (eg, repeatechocardiogram, staged PCI)
nAssess whether vaccinations are current (eg,
inﬂuenza)
nPerform medication reconciliation, including a
prescription for sublingual nitroglycerin, unless
contraindicated
Patient/caregiver
assessmentnAssess capacity for patient/caregiver for self-care(eg, secondary prevention, symptom monitoring,
following plan of care, lifestyle changes, contact
information for continuing care team)
nProvide verbal and written educational informa-
tion related to self-care
nUse teach-back method to con ﬁrm understanding
of self-care
nUse teach-back method for patient/caregiverunderstanding of medication adherence and
treatment regimen
Referrals
nConﬁrm referral to CR
nProvide educational materials related to CR
including contact information
Social determinants
of healthnAssess and address barriers to obtaining andtaking prescribed medications, to include referral
to pharmacy assistance programs or social worker
as appropriate
nAssess and address barriers to attending CR,
including viability of home-based or hybrid CR
ACS indicates acute coronary syndromes; CR, cardiac rehabilitation; EHR, electronic
health record; and PCI, percutaneous coronary intervention.TABLE 20 Essential Components of Patient Education
nReason for hospitalization (expla in reason for admission, diagnostic
tests, procedural results)
nTailored discussion of lifestyle modi ﬁcations (AHA ’sL i f e ’sE s s e n t i a l8 )5
nMedications (written and verbal instructions including purpose, dose,
frequency, potential adverse effects of each medication; re ﬁll in-
structions; changes to prehospital r egimen; importance of adherence)
nSymptom management (what to monitor for and actions to take should
symptoms recur, including whom to call)
nReturning to daily routine (when to resume physical activity, sexual
activity, work, and travel)
nPsychosocial considerations (open dialogue about symptoms of
depression and anxiety)
nFollow-up care (future appointments with cardiology, CR, additional
testing postdischarge)
AHA indicates American Heart Association; and CR, cardiac rehabilitation.Rao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372196

10.5.3. Cardiac Rehabilitation
Synopsis
CR is a multifaceted and comprehensive outpatient
intervention that is considered the standard of care forsecondary prevention of CVD. The primary goals of CR aremodifying CVD risk factors and improving patient func-
tional capacity and QOL with the goal of reducing subse-quent morbidity and mortality. Through a combination ofmonitored exercise training, health and nutrition educa-
tion, psychological support, and personalized patient
assessment, including me dication optimization
(Figure 10 ), CR has been shown to lower the risk of car-
diovascular and all-cause death, reduce hospital read-missions, and to be cost-effective.
10,11Despite its proven
bene ﬁts, CR is underutilized and referral rates to CR are
low, especially for women and members of traditionallyunderrepresented groups.
8Factors that contribute to this
overall low enrollment rate include a poor utilization of a
centralized method for referral via the electronic health
record, inadequate communication between treatmentteams, and perceived inconvenience as well as associatedcosts for the patient.
8To increase the utilization of CR,
patients should be referred to CR during hospitalizationfor ACS and prior to discharge.
12To improve access for
patients who live in rural locations and in areas with nocenter-based CR, home-based CR options should be
considered. These home-based CR programs have similar
shorter-term safety and clinical outcomes (eg, improve-ments in exercise capacity, QOL, blood pressure, choles-terol) as center-based CR.
13-15More intensive CR programs
FIGURE 10 Core Components of Cardiac Rehabilitation
Adapted with permission from Sandesara et al.30Copyright 2015 American College of Cardiology Foundation.Recommendations for CR
Referenced studies that support recommendations aresummarized in the Evidence Table .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1A1. Patients with ACS should be
referred to an outpatient CR
program prior to hospital
discharge to reduce death, MI,hospital readmissions, andimprove functional status and
QOL.
1-4
2a B-R2. In patients with ACS, a home-
based CR program is a reasonablealternative to a center-based CR
program to improve functional
status and QOL.
5-9JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2197

have been developed with a goal of expanding the bene-
ﬁts of traditional CR programs through additional exer-
c i s ea n de d u c a t i o ns e s s i o n s ,a sw e l la sp l a c i n gag r e a t e rfocus on diet and lifestyle factors.
16-18Although improved
outcomes have been described with an intensive pro-
gram,16,19the studies are observational in nature. Both
traditional and intensive CR programs remain underutil-ized, so the primary emphasis should be on enrollmentand adherence to any CR program.
20
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Exercise-based CR programs are associated with
improved survival and reduced risk of reinfarction in
patients after AMI.1-4CR can be enhanced as a
component of a multifactorial rehabilitation programwith risk factor education and counseling. Patientswith ACS who participate in CR have signi ﬁcantly
better outcomes compared with those who donot.
1,21,22In a meta-analysis of 85 RCTs of exercise-
b a s e dC Ri np a t i e n t sw i t hc o r o n a r yh e a r td i s e a s e ,the intervention reduced risk of MI, reduced all-cause
hospitalization, reduced health care costs, and
improved health-related QOL outcomes over 12months of follow-up.
1Longer follow-up suggested
reductions in cardiovascular mortality.1,4CR is
particularly bene ﬁcial in older patients with CAD, a
group that is at a higher risk of losing independenceand functioning.
23-26
2. To overcome challenges that have prevented greater
patient participation, new strategies and innovative
models that utilize digital health tools are emerging tomeet the evolving needs of CR patients. CR programshave traditionally been delivered via center-based CR.These programs require patients to be physically pre-sent at a facility located in a hospital or outpatientcenter, which limits access for many patients, espe-cially women and some racial and ethnic groups.
9,27,28
A review of 23 RCTs of home- and center-based CR
found that these programs tend to implement the samecore components.
13These include patient assessment
of current medical history, e xercise training, dietary
counseling, risk factor management (eg, smoking,lipids, blood pressure, weight, diabetes), and psycho-logical intervention. Comparison of studies in home-and center-based CR indicate a similar improvement in
QOL and no statistically signi ﬁcant difference in the
all-cause mortality rate up to 12 months after theintervention.
5,6However, more RCTs are needed with
home-based CR in patients with ACS because of anevidence gap (especially in high-risk patients) inassessing the safety of home-based CR in patients athigh risk for recurrent ischemic events, as well theimpact of a home-based rehabilitation strategy on
clinical outcomes such as cardiovascular death,recurrent MI, and rehospitalization.
29Advances in
technology and remote monitoring may help toimprove the ef ﬁcacy and safety of this approach.
Hybrid models that combine elements of both center-and home-based programs may also offer bene ﬁts.
11. DISCHARGE: LONG-TERM MANAGEMENT AND
SECONDARY PREVENTION
11.1. DAPT Strategies in the First 12 Months Postdischarge
Recommendations for DAPT Strategies in the First
12 Months PostdischargeReferenced studies that support recommendations aresummarized in the Evidence Table .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
Default Duration of DAPT
1A1. In patients with ACS who are not
at high bleeding risk, DAPT with
aspirin and an oral P2Y12 inhibi-
tor should be administered for atleast 1 year to reduce MACE.
1-6
Bleeding Reduction Strategies
1A2. In patients with ACS who have
tolerated DAPT with ticagrelor,
transition to ticagrelor
monotherapy ‡1 month post PCI
is useful to reduce bleedingrisk.
7-11
1A3. In patients at high risk of
gastrointestinal bleeding, a pro-
ton pump inhibitor (PPI) is rec-
ommended in combination withDAPT, oral anticoagulants, orboth to reduce risk of
bleeding.
12-15
2b B-R4. In patients with ACS undergoing
PCI, de-escalation of DAPT
(switching from ticagrelor orprasugrel to clopidogrel) after 1month may be reasonable to
reduce bleeding risk.
16-20
2b B-R5. In patients with ACS undergoing
PCI who are at high bleeding risk,
transition to single antiplatelettherapy (aspirin or P2Y12 inhibi-tor) after 1 month may be
reasonable to reduce bleeding
risk.
21Rao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372198

Synopsis
The addition of an oral P2Y12 inhibitor to aspirin
(DAPT) reduces the risk of early and late thromboticevents among patients with ACS regardless of whetherthey are managed with an invasive strategy.
1-3Notwith-
standing these salutary bene ﬁts, prolonged exposure to
DAPT results in excess bleeding that may lead to DAPTinterruption,
22which in turn may increase the risk of
recurrent ischemic events.23Identifying individuals most
likely to realize a net clinical bene ﬁto rh a r mf r o mp r o -
longed DAPT has emerged as an important clinical prior-ity. Several tools have been developed that predict therisk of ischemic and/or bleeding events and may be useful
when considering how best to personalize care for an in-
dividual patient.
24-27Moreover, alternative antiplatelet
strategies have been compare dw i t hc o n v e n t i o n a lD A P T
with the intent to reduce bleeding while maintainingischemic ef ﬁcacy. Growing evidence suggests that a
strategy of aspirin discontinuation with ticagrelor mono-therapy reduces bleeding.
7-11Although clopidogrel mon-
otherapy has been studied,28,29interpatient variability in
pharmacodynamic response to clopidogrel is substantial30
and may increase thrombotic risk in certain individuals.
To that end, a strategy of clopidogrel monotherapy mayincrease risk of MACE in patients after ACS whencompared with more prolonged DAPT.
29Additional ap-
proaches include aspirin monotherapy31,32or a strategy of
“de-escalation ”(ie, switching from ticagrelor or prasugrel
to clopidogrel),16-20although the safety of these strategies
in terms of their effects on risk of MACE is less ﬁrmly
established. Ef ﬁcacy and safety of shorter DAPT strategies
have not been rigorously studied in patients not under-going PCI. Figure 11 summarizes the guideline recom-
mendations for DAPT management in patients with ACSduring the ﬁrst 12 months post discharge.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Patients with ACS are characterized by a sustained
prothrombotic state,
33thus highlighting the need for
continued antithromboti c therapy beyond the index
presentation. The double-blind placebo-controlledCURE (Clopidogrel in Unstable Angina to PreventRecurrent Events) trial (n ¼12,562) demonstrated that
DAPT with clopidogrel yields a consistent reduction inboth early and late composite ischemic events as
compared with aspirin alone among patients with
NSTE-ACS who were primarily managed medically.
3,34The treatment effect was consistent among those
t r e a t e dw i t ho rw i t h o u tr e v a s c u l a r i z a t i o n .4Subsequent
studies showed that DAPT with prasugrel or ticagreloradministered for 1 year provides incremental re-ductions in ischemic events, albeit with excess
bleeding, as compared with clopidogrel.
1,2Although
concordant bene ﬁts were also observed among trial
participants requiring surgical revascularization, thesafety and ef ﬁcacy of DAPT should be considered in the
context of CABG as a postrandomization event and thehigh proportion of patients who did not resume studydrug after surgery.
4-6An important consideration in
extending the results of clinical trials that established
the bene ﬁts of DAPT to contemporary cohorts is that
patients at elevated risk for bleeding were typicallyexcluded in early studies. Therefore, the defaultstrategy for a minimum DAPT duration of 1 year is mostapplicable to those patients without high bleeding riskpresenting with ACS. Moreover, the choice of P2Y12inhibitor may vary in relati on to treatment approach,
as described in Section 4.3.2 ,“Oral P2Y12 Inhibitors
During Hospitalization. ”In select patients who have
tolerated DAPT, it may be reasonable to extend treat-ment beyond 1 year after considering risks for long-term bleeding and thrombosis.
35-37
2. Results from several randomized trials have consis-
tently shown that aspirin withdrawal followed byticagrelor monotherapy after 1 to 3 months ofticagrelor-based DAPT resu lts in less bleeding without
clear excess in MACE, as compared with continued
DAPT among patients with ACS undergoing PCI.
7-11
Although studies examining this strategy were char-acterized by relatively low rates of ischemic events,study-level
38and individual patient data pooled ana-
lyses39-41have yielded similar results. Although data
with clopidogrel have been mixed, concerns have beenraised that a strategy of clopidogrel monotherapy
started 1 to 2 months after PCI may increase risk of
MACE in patients with ACS when compared with longerDAPT.
29It remains unknown whether this may be
explained by excess thrombotic risk in patients dis-playing inadequate platelet inhibition to clopidogrel,observed in 30% to 40% of patients after PCI.
30,42Re-
sults from a randomized tria l showed that a strategy of
P2Y12 inhibitor discontinuation followed by aspirin
alone after 6 months of DAPT resulted in excess
thrombotic risk among patients with ACS undergoingJACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2199

PCI (n ¼2,712; 38% STEMI), albeit with less bleeding.32
Similar ﬁndings were observed with earlier P2Y12 in-
hibitor discontinuation 3 months after PCI.31,43
Although the on-treatment pharmacodynamic effects
of ticagrelor and prasugrel are similar, the safety of
prasugrel monotherapy has not been established inpatients $1 month post ACS; low-dose prasugrel mon-
otherapy (3.75 mg daily) in Japanese patients very earlyafter PCI with ACS or at high bleeding risk may increase30-day MACE compared with DAPT.
44
3. PPIs reduce the risk of gastrointestinal bleeding among
patients receiving aspirin,14DAPT,13or an oral antico-
agulant.12,15Because the conversion of clopidogrel to
its active metabolite and the metabolism of certainPPIs depend on some common hepatic enzymes (eg,C Y P 2 C 1 9 ) ,t h ep o t e n t i a lf o rad r u g - d r u gi n t e r a c t i o nexists when both agents are coadministered. The re-sults of several ex vivo studies found that clopidogrel-induced platelet inhibition is attenuated with use of
certain PPIs, a pharmacodynamic effect that is mostpronounced with omeprazole.
45,46Nonetheless, results
from a double-blind, placebo-controlled randomizedtrial showed no signi ﬁcant differences in ischemic
events between omeprazole versus placebo among
patients treated with clopi dogrel, but PPI use markedly
decreased the risk of gastrointestinal bleeding.
13
Moreover, post hoc analyses from several randomizedtrials have shown that ischemic risk is not increasedwhen a clinically indicated PPI is used with clopidog-rel.
47,48Importantly, the antipla telet effects and clin-
ical ef ﬁcacy of ticagrelor and prasugrel are not
appreciably modi ﬁed with concomitant PPI use.48-50
Therefore, it is recommended to administer a PPI in
patients with ACS at elevated bleeding risk treatedwith DAPT or oral anticoagulant.
4. De-escalation implies modulating DAPT intensity by
switching from ticagrelor or prasugrel to clopidogrel.
51
De-escalation can be guided by the results of plateletfunction assays that quantify the degree of platelet
inhibition among patients treated with clopidogrel.
Patients with adequate response may continue toreceive clopidogrel, whereas nonresponders areswitched to a more potent P2Y12 inhibitor. Clopidogrelresponsiveness may also be inferred with use of gen-otyping assays that identify polymorphisms in genesinvolved in clopidogrel metabolism.
52Clinical trials
examining guided de-escalation after PCI have either
shown a lack of bene ﬁt,16noninferiority,20or re-
ductions in minor bleeding17versus conventional
DAPT. By contrast, unguided de-escalation is per-formed without antecedent knowledge of plateletresponsiveness. Randomized trials have suggested thatunguided de-escalation 1 month after PCI reducesbleeding without incurring ischemic risk as comparedwith longer term prasugrel- or ticagrelor-based
DAPT.
18,19Pooled analyses ha ve shown that de-
escalation (guided or unguided) yields comparable ef-ﬁcacy to DAPT with respect to ischemic events while
reducing bleeding.
53,54However, trials of ticagrelor
and prasugrel have suggested that the bene ﬁto fm o r e
potent P2Y12 inhibitor therapy extends beyond theearly phase post ACS, but w ith increased bleeding.
1,2,55
5. In the MASTER DAPT (Management of High Bleeding
Risk Patients Post Bioresorbable Polymer Coated Stent
Implantation With an Abbreviated Versus StandardDAPT Regimen) trial, patients at high risk of bleedingwho had completed a 4-week course of DAPT aftersuccessful PCI with drug-eluting stents were randomlyallocated to single antiplatelet therapy or more pro-longed DAPT ( $2 additional months).
21In the absence
of oral anticoagulant use, the choice of discontinuing
a s p i r i no rP 2 Y 1 2i n h i b i t o ra n dt h ec h o i c eo fP 2 Y 1 2TABLE 22Academic Research Consortium High Bleeding Risk
Criteria After PCI
Major Criteria26Minor Criteria
Age$75 y
Anticipated use of long-term oral
anticoagulation ( Section 11.1.1 ,
“Antiplatelet Therapy in Patients on
Anticoagulation Postdischarge ”)
Severe or end-stage CKD
(eGFR <30 mL/min)Moderate CKD (eGFR 30-59 mL/min)
Hemoglobin level <11 g/dL Hemoglobin level 11-12.9 g/dL for men and
11-11.9 g/dL for women
Spontaneous bleeding requiring
hospitalization or transfusion in the past
6 mo or at any time, if recurrentSpontaneous bleeding requiring
hospitalization or transfusion within the
past 12 mo not meeting the majorcriterion
Moderate or severe baseline
thrombocytopenia (plateletcount<100 /C210
9/L)
Chronic bleeding diathesis
Liver cirrhosis with portal hypertension
Long-term use of oral NSAIDs or steroids
Active malignancy (excluding nonmelanoma
skin cancer) within the past 12 mo
Previous spontaneous ICH (at any time)
Previous traumatic ICH within the past 12 mo
Presence of a brain arteriovenous
malformation
Moderate or severe ischemic stroke within
the past 6 moAny ischemic stroke at any time not meeting
the major criterion
Nondeferrable major surgery on DAPT
Recent major surgery or major trauma within
30 d before PCI
The presence of at least 1 major or 2 minor criteria helps to identify those at increased risk of
bleeding. Modi ﬁed with permission from Urban et al.26Copyright 2019 American Heart Association,
Inc.
CKD indicates chronic kidney disease; DAPT, dual antiplatelet therapy; eGFR, estimated
glomerular ﬁltration rate; NSAID, nonsteroidal anti-in ﬂammatory drugs; ICH, intracranial hemor-
rhage; and PCI, percutaneous coronary intervention.Rao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372200

inhibitor was at the discretion of the treating physi-
c i a n .A no r a la n t i c o a g u l a n tw a su s e di n3 6 . 4 %o fp a -
tients, and clopidogrel monotherapy was selected in53.9% of patients randomized to abbreviated DAPT.Compared with standard therapy, an abbreviated an-tiplatelet strategy demonstrated noninferiority withrespect to composite ischemic events and superiorityregarding clinically rele vant bleeding over 1 year.
Among patients with ACS (n ¼1,780; 30% STEMI)
allocated to an abbreviated strategy, clinicians selected
a potent P2Y12 inhibitor with ticagrelor use inapproximately 25% of patients.
56Results in the ACS
cohort were qualitatively consistent with the overalltrial results with respect to both ischemic and bleedingo u t c o m e s .A l t h o u g ht h et r i a ld e m o n s t r a t e dn o n -inferiority for abbreviated DAPT with respect to MACEin patients at high bleeding risk, it was underpowered
to determine the relative safety of discontinuing
aspirin versus P2Y12 inhibitor. Multiple studies haveidenti ﬁed clinical and laborator y predictors of bleeding
and/or ischemic risk.
24-27The Academic Research
Consortium determined 20 correlates of bleeding andproposed a consensus-based de ﬁnition of highbleeding risk as the presence of having at least 1 major
or 2 minor criteria at time of PCI ( Table 22 ).
26
11.1.1. Antiplatelet Therapy in Patients on Anticoagulation
PostdischargeFIGURE 11 DAPT Strategies in the First 12 Months Postdischarge
Colors correspond to Class of Recommendation in Table 2 . *High bleeding risk discussed in Section 11.1 ,“Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text ”item 5, and
outlined in Table 22 . ACS indicates acute coronary syndromes; DAPT, dual antiplatelet therapy; OAC, oral anticoagulant; PCI, percutaneous coronary intervention; and
SAPT, single antiplatelet therapy.
Recommendation for Antiplatelet Therapy in Patients on
Anticoagulation PostdischargeReferenced studies that support recommendation aresummarized in the Evidence Table .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
1 B-R1. In patients with ACS who require
oral anticoagulant therapy,
aspirin should be discontinuedafter 1 to 4 weeks of tripleantithrombotic therapy, with
continued use of a P2Y12 inhibi-
tor (preferably clopidogrel) andan oral anticoagulant to reducebleeding risk. *
1-5
*Modi ﬁed from the “2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Guideline for Coronary Artery
Revascularization. ”6JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2201

Synopsis
Patients after ACS may frequently have indications
for anticoagulant therapy, including AF, venousthromboembolism, and prosthetic heart valves.Bleeding risks are increased in the setting of triple
therapy with the combination of aspirin, P2Y12 in-
hibitor, and anticoagulant. Therefore, the bene ﬁts of
these therapies must be weighed against the risk ofbleeding. A growing number of studies have demon-strated the overall safety of a strategy of aspirindiscontinuation 1 to 4 weeks after ACS or PCI in pa-tients who require anticoagulation after ACS.
1-5For
most patients, a DOAC will be preferred over a
vitamin K antagonist due to their favorable ef ﬁcacy
and safety pro ﬁle.7Trials of more potent P2Y12 in-
hibitors (ie, prasugrel and ticagrelor) excluded patientsrequiring long-term anticoag ulation; therefore, clopi-
dogrel is generally favored as the P2Y12 inhibitor inthis setting for most patients. The decision whether tocontinue anticoagulant with or without antiplatelettherapy >12 months after ACS is addressed in the
“2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Guideline for
the Management of Patients with Chronic CoronaryDisease. ”
8
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Several RCTs have demonstrated that the discontinua-
tion of aspirin 1 to 4 weeks aft er PCI reduces the risk of
bleeding in patients with AF with an indication for
DAPT and an oral anticoagulant.1-5Although individual
studies were not powered for ischemic endpoints,m e t a - a n a l y s e sa c r o s sr a n d o m i z e dt r i a l ss u g g e s tn odifference in mortality, stroke, and overall MACE whenaspirin is discontinued for patients on an oral antico-agulant, albeit with a marginal apparent increase in MIand stent thrombosis.
9-14An analysis of stent throm-
bosis rates suggested that 80% of events occurred
within 30 days of PCI, with stent thrombosis events
numerically less frequent in those receiving aspirin(randomization was approximately 1 week after PCI)c o m p a r e dw i t hp l a c e b oi nt h eA U G U S T U S( A n t i t h -rombotic Therapy After Acute Coronary Syndrome orPCI in Atrial Fibrillation) trial.
15,16Therefore, in pa-
tients with a high risk of stent thrombosis, aspirin forup to 30 days after PCI could be considered. P2Y12 in-
hibitor therapy should be continued for at least 12
months after PCI following aspirin discontinuation butcould be discontinued earlier in those with multiplerisk factors for bleeding.
17,1811.2. Reassessment of Lipid Levels Postdischarge
Synopsis
Aggressive LDL-C lowering is an important component
of secondary CVD prevention. For every 1.0-mmol/L ( w39
mg/dL) reduction of LDL-C, an approximate 22% relative
reduction in cardiovascular events is observed over aperiod of 4 to 5 years.
2Despite the growing number of
lipid-lowering therapies currently available, manypatients with ACS do not achieve target LDL-C levels.
4,5
The reasons are varied but include underprescribing by
providers, cost or insuf ﬁcient coverage by medical in-
surance companies, and intolerance to therapies. Many
patients are also unwilling or unable to readily ﬁll pre-
scriptions at pharmacies or patients self-discontinuetherapy early. Providers are not always aware of the bar-riers that patients may be experiencing; therefore, aconversation between clinician and patient is importantto help improve adherence. If adverse effects are experi-enced, consideration should be given to subsequentrechallenge at each visit or changing to a different type of
statin or class of lipid-lowering therapy. Statin intoler-
ance requires exposure to at le ast 2 different statins with 1
prescribed at the lowest available dose. Because risk ofMACE is elevated in the early months after ACS, earlyfollow-up visits are important for making appropriatechanges to lipid-lowering therapy to help achieve desiredLDL-C targets ( Section 4.5 ,“Lipid Management ”).
Importantly, lipid-lowering therapies should not be
downtitrated in response to very low LDL-C concentra-
tions, because current evid ence supports that those with
very low LDL-C concentrations are at lowest risk of MACEwithout any clear safety concern.
6-9
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Use of high-potency statin therapy has been shown to
reduce MACE with the bene ﬁt appearing early after ACS
and persisting with time.10To date, evidence suggests
the bene ﬁt of lowering LDL-C concentrations may beRecommendation for Reassessment of Lipid Levels
Postdischarge
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
1 C-LD1. In patients after ACS, a fasting
l i p i dp a n e li sr e c o m m e n d e d4t o8 weeks after initiation or dose
adjustment of lipid-lowering
therapy to assess response oradherence to therapy. *
1,2
*Modi ﬁed from the “2018 AHA/ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/ADA/AGS/APhA/ ASPC/
NLA/PCNA Guideline on the Management of Blood Cholesterol. ”3Rao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372202

irrespective of whether it is achieved through high-
potency statins or other lipid-lowering therapies;however, the largest body of evidence exists with statintherapies. As such, early intensi ﬁcation of lipid-
lowering therapy after ACS is justi ﬁed. In clinical
practice, statin-eligible patients remain undertreated
or untreated.
1,11Early and frequent follow-up,
including lipid testing, is associated with improvedadherence to lipid-lowering therapies.
1In the PALM
(Provider Assessment of Lipid Management) registry,less than one-half of adults were on the statin intensityrecommended by the guidelines.
12In a study of U.S.
veterans with a history of ACS or coronary revascular-
ization, less than one-half of patients received inten-
siﬁcation of lipid-lowering therapy (41.9% at 3 months
versus 47.3% at 1-year postdischarge).5High patient
copays and poor coverage of newer lipid-loweringtherapies by some prescription plans are factorscontributing to suboptimal LDL target attainment. To
that end, out-of-pocket costs should be veri ﬁed and
discussed with patients before they ﬁll a prescription
for a new lipid-lowering therapy. Education about the
importance of lipid-lowering therapies should be dis-cussed with patients at visits to allow them the op-portunity to ask questions and review potentialbarriers. For the management of lipid-lowering therapyinitiated prior to discharge a nd continued after hospital
discharge, refer to Section 4.5 ,“Lipid Management. ”
11.3. SGLT-2 Inhibitors and GLP-1 Receptor Agonists
Synopsis
The cardiovascular bene ﬁts of both sodium glucose
cotransporter-2 (SGLT-2) inhibitors and glucagon-likepeptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor ag onists are well documented
in stable patients with ASCVD and type 2 diabetes,
1-6as
well as in patients with HF regardless of diabetesstatus.
7-11GLP-1 receptor agonists may lead to weight loss
in many patients, and semaglutide has been shown tor e d u c et h er i s ko fM A C Ei no v e r w e i g h to ro b e s ep a t i e n t s
with stable ASCVD but has not been studied early after
ACS.
12SGLT-2 inhibitors may inc rease the risk of urinary
tract infection, genital myco tic infection, hypovolemia,
and acute kidney injury (while offering longer term renalbene ﬁt in patients with diabetes). Due to a higher risk of
diabetic and euglycemic ketoacidosis in the perioperativeperiod, canagli ﬂozin, dapagli ﬂozin, and empagli ﬂozin
should be stopped $3d a y sa n de r t u g l i ﬂozin$4d a y sp r i o r
to scheduled surgery, including CABG.
13-15
The ef ﬁcacy and safety of SGLT-2 inhibitors have now
been studied in 2 large trials of patients after MI. In pa-tients without diabetes or HF, dapagli ﬂozin was notshown to reduce the risk of cardiovascular death or HF
hospitalization in patients with AMI and impaired LVsystolic function.
16Similarly, empagli ﬂozin did not
signi ﬁcantly reduce all-cause death or ﬁrst HF hospitali-
zation in patients without prior HF who were hospitalized
with AMI and found to have impaired LV systolic function
with or without signs of congestion. However, empagli-ﬂozin did reduce HF hospitalizations in this population.
17
No new safety concerns were identi ﬁed. Therefore, use of
an SGLT-2 inhibitor does not need to be deferred in pa-tients with an indication for its use at hospital discharge.
11.4. Use of Chronic Colchicine
Synopsis
Colchicine is a botanical-derived anti-in ﬂammatory
agent that has been used for millennia in the treatment of
gout. Colchicine reduces neutrophil adhesion to endo-thelial cells and platelets and has been shown to reducehigh-sensitivity C-reactive protein concentration andlow-attenuation plaque volume in patients already onaspirin and statin therapy.
6-9Colchicine is associated with
a lower risk of MI in patients with gout, as well as in pa-tients with CAD, including those with prior MI.
1,4,5,10,11
Although gastrointestinal events were historically re-
ported at a higher rate in patients on colchicine, this ratedoes not differ from placebo at the lower once dailydosing.
5A meta-analysis of the studies examining
colchicine in patients with CAD reported no difference inall-cause death with colchicine versus placebo, but anonsigni ﬁcant trend was observed toward an increased
risk of noncardiovascular death that requires further
study.
5To date, no potential pathogeneses of the non-
cardiovascular deaths have been consistently shown toexplain the numerical differences in noncardiovasculardeath.
5
Recommendation-Speci ﬁcS u p p o r t i v eT e x t
1. COLCOT (Colchicine Cardiovascular Outcomes Trial)
randomized patients #30 days (median, 14 days) after
MI to low-dose colchicine versus placebo.2Colchicine
reduced the primary outcome of cardiovascular death,Recommendation for Use of Chronic Colchicine
Referenced studies that support recommendation aresummarized in the Evidence Table .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
2b B-R1. In patients after ACS, low-dose
colchicine may be reasonable toreduce risk of MACE.
1-5JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2203

resuscitated cardiac arrest, MI, stroke, or urgent coro-
nary revascularization by 32% (median follow-up, 22.6months). Although directional consistency was seenacross individual components, this bene ﬁtw a sd r i v e n
by a reduction in hospitaliz ations for angina requiring
revascularization and stroke. The smaller COPS
(Colchicine in Patients With ACS) study randomizedpatients during their index hospitalization of ACS to
colchicine versus placebo.
3The primary endpoint of all-
cause death, ACS, unplanned ischemia-driven urgentrevascularization, and noncardioembolic ischemicstroke was numerically, but not signi ﬁcantly, lower for
patients on colchicine ( P¼0.09). Although deaths were
infrequent, more deaths occurred for patients on
colchicine than on placebo (8 versus 1; P¼0.017) due
to more noncardiovascular deaths. In a post hocanalysis, the composite outcome of cardiovasculardeath, ACS, stroke, or urgent revascularization waslower for colchicine than placebo. The LoDoCo2 (Low-Dose Colchicine-2) trial enrolled patients with stable(>6 months) coronary disease, demonstrating a
reduction in the composite of cardiovascular death,
MI, ischemic stroke, or ischemia-driven coronaryrevascularization with col chicine (median follow-up,
28.6 months); ﬁndings were consistent in the 84% of
patients with prior ACS.
4,12Pooled data from these
large trials con ﬁrmed a reduction in the incidence of
MACE with colchicine versus placebo.5Colchicine
should not be administered in patients with blood
dyscrasias, renal failure (creatinine clearance <15 mL/
min), severe hepatic impairment, or with concomitantP-glycoprotein and/or st rong CYP3A4 inhibitors.
Although the trials studied a dose of 0.5 mg daily,daily dosing of 0.5 mg or 0.6 mg may be considered.There are ongoing trials studying the ef ﬁcacy of
colchicine in patients after MI.
11.5. ImmunizationSynopsis
Inﬂuenza infection is associated with increased risks of
cardiovascular morb idity and mortality.
5Previous studies
have shown that in ﬂuenza infection may contribute to
atherogenesis and plaque destabilization, thereby
precipitating the occurrence of ACS.6,7Inﬂuenza vaccine
has been shown to reduce the risk of death and MACE inpatients after ACS and ASC V Da n ds h o u l dt h e r e f o r eb e
administered in patients without contraindication.
1-3,5,8
O t h e ri l l n e s s e ss u c ha sC O V I D - 1 9a n dp n e u m o c o c c a l
pneumonia increase risk of cardiovascular events anddeath in patients with ASCVD. However, randomized trialdata are lacking to support routine administration of
other vaccines for patients at time of hospitalization for
ACS. As such, regular immunization schedules are sup-ported for all patients per the U.S. Centers for DiseaseControl and Prevention recommendations in the absenceof contraindication.
9
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. In the FLUVACS (Flu Vaccination in Acute Coronary
Syndromes and Planned Percutaneous Coronary In-
terventions) study, cardiovascular death was lower inpatients who received in ﬂuenza vaccination compared
with the control group at both 6-month (2% versus 8%)and 1-year follow-up (6% versus 17%). The triple com-posite endpoint of cardiovascular death, nonfatal MI,and rehospitalization for severe recurrent ischemia at 1year was signi ﬁcantly lower in the vaccine group
c o m p a r e dw i t hc o n t r o l s .
2,10Among patients admitted
with MI or high-risk coronary heart disease, in ﬂuenza
vaccine administered within 72 hours of an invasivecoronary procedure or hospitalization resulted in alower risk of the composite primary outcome of all-cause death, MI, or stent thrombosis and a lower riskof cardiovascular death compared with placebo at 1year.
1
12. EVIDENCE GAPS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
The treatment of ACS has been the subject of thousands of
clinical trials comprising very large numbers of patients.
As such, its management is guided by the largest evidencebase in clinical medicine. Despite this, there arenumerous unanswered questions, evidence gaps, andareas for further study. Some of these areas have beenaddressed by observational studies but were not includedin this guideline because the LOE was insuf ﬁcient to
guide clinical practice. Other areas were not included
because they are less well de ﬁned and require more
detailed study. This section summarizes some higherpriority evidence gaps and areas for future study.Recommendation for Immunization
Referenced studies that support recommendation aresummarized in the Evidence Table .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
1A1. In patients with ACS without a
contraindication, annual in ﬂu-
enza vaccination is recommended
to reduce the risk of death and
MACE.1-4Rao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372204

INITIAL EVALUATION AND MANAGEMENT
Although the 2025 ACS guideline recognizes the value of
risk scores in estimating the risk of death or recurrent MI,limited prospective randomized data are available as towhether risk scores should be used to determine treat-ment strategies. The highest risk patients are those whopresent after a cardiac arrest . Although the data support
an invasive approach in patients who have been resusci-
tated and who have evidence of ST-segment elevation on
the postarrest ECG, any potential bene ﬁto fc o r o n a r y
angiography may be attenuated in those who are coma-tose. Similarly, it is less clear whether reperfusion witheither ﬁbrinolysis or primary PCI provides clinical bene ﬁt
in patients with ST-segment elevation who present late
after symptom onset (12 to 48 hours) but who are nolonger symptomatic. Further research is needed to de ﬁne
the role of coronary angiography and revascularization in
these patient subgroups.
In-Hospital Management of ACS
Patients with ACS are placed on telemetry to monitor for
life-threatening arrhythmias or for rhythm disturbancesthat may require further the rapy (eg, atrioventricular
block, AF). Given the length of stay for most patients withACS has decreased signi ﬁc a n t l y ,t h eo p t i m a ld u r a t i o no f
telemetry monitoring with contemporary management isunclear. The increasingly rapid triage and timing of
invasive risk strati ﬁcation also calls into question the
value of “preloading ”of oral P2Y12 inhibitors, with pre-
loading de ﬁned as administering the loading dose prior to
coronary angiography. As ou tlined in this document,
clinical trials of preloading have not shown a compellingbene ﬁt when coronary angiography occurs rapidly after
the patient ’s clinical presentation. Nonetheless, the
pharmacodynamic effects of clopidogrel are delayed due
to its need to be metabolized to its active metabolite, and
there are reports that the antiplatelet effects of all P2Y12inhibitors may be delayed in patients with STEMI. In thiscontext, parenteral P2Y12 inhibition could be consideredbut has not yet been compared to a strategy of morepotent oral P2Y12 inhibitor administration. Other drugtherapies in need of further evaluation in the ACS setting
include the utility of sacubitril-valsartan, nonstatin lipid-lowering therapies (including clinical outcome studies forPCSK9 inhibitors early after ACS), and GLP-1 receptoragonists for reducing short- and long-term MACE after
ACS. The clinical bene ﬁt of beta blockers in the setting of
patients with NSTE-ACS requires further study, as well asthe optimal duration of their use after ACS.
For patients with MVD found during coronary angiog-
raphy, there are several remaining gaps in evidence. Inpatients with NSTEMI, the role of multivessel PCI versusculprit-only PCI needs further supportive data. As a cor-ollary, whether multivessel PCI in the ACS setting should
be guided by angiography or physiology is still a matter of
debate. Finally, as noted in this guideline, the recom-mendations for PCI of nonculprit arteries in patients withSTEMI are for patients who are not intended for CABG,which is a quali ﬁer based on the inclusion criteria of the
randomized trials. The optimal strategy for patients whohave more complex anatomy is less clear.
The 2025 ACS guideline includes a new recommenda-
tion regarding the management of cardiogenic shock us-
ing the microaxial ﬂow pump MCS device. Because the
bene ﬁt of this device was offset by an increase in serious
complications, more data are needed to guide the selec-tion of patients for MCS, the timing of MCS placement andduration of support, and stra tegies to reduce the risks of
vascular complications, ble eding, and limb ischemia.
DISCHARGE STRATEGIES AND
SECONDARY PREVENTION
One of the most important areas needing further clari ﬁ-
cation is the timeline de ﬁning the transition of a patient
from ACS to chronic coronary syndrome. The 2025 ACSguideline does not de ﬁne this largely because no data
exist to guide any recommendations. Moreover, it is likely
that this transition is highly individualized and accountsfor the patient ’s risk at initial presentation, the status of
residual unrevascularized CAD, control of cardiovascularrisk factors, and bleeding risk with continued antith-rombotic therapy. Once a patient is deemed to haveJACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2205

transitioned to having a “chronic coronary syndrome, ”
the question of how to or whether to de-escalate anti-platelet therapies is unclear. These decisions may also beinﬂuenced by complications of ACS requiring additional
antithrombotic therapy such as LV thrombus from a large
anterior wall MI. The role of DOACs in this setting appears
prudent but is not supported by a robust body of data.Other complications such as post-MI pericarditis nowhave several therapeutic options, but no comparative dataare available to help determine which approach isoptimal.
With respect to long-term secondary prevention, more
research is needed to determine whether home-based CR
provides the same bene ﬁt as facility-based programs and
results in higher rates of adherence. Randomized trials ofGLP-1 receptor agonists post MI will be important to un-derstand the role of these agents in reducing long-termrisk in patients with diabetes or those who are over-weight or with obesity. Finally, data are lacking on the useof high-dose aspirin in those with post-MI pericarditis,a n da d d i t i o n a ld a t aw o u l db eu s e f u lt oc o n ﬁrm the ef ﬁ-
cacy of colchicine post ACS.
PRESIDENTS AND STAFF
American College of Cardiology
Cathleen Biga, MSN, FACC, PresidentCathleen C. Gates, Chief Executive Of ﬁcer
Richard J. Kovacs, MD, MACC, Chief Medical Of ﬁcerJustine Varieur Turco, Divisional Vice President, Scienti ﬁc
Publications and Guidelines
Mindy J. Saraco, MHA, Director, Clinical Policy and
Guidelines
G r a c eD .R o n a n ,S e n i o rP r o d u c t i o na n dO p e r a t i o n s
Manager, Clinical Policy Publications
Leah Patterson, Project Manager, Clinical Content
Development
American College of Cardiology/American Heart AssociationThomas S.D. Getchius, National Senior Director,
Guidelines
Abdul R. Abdullah, MD, Director, Guideline Science and
Methodology
American Heart Association
Keith Churchwell, MD, FAHA, PresidentNancy Brown, Chief Executive Of ﬁcer
Mariell Jessup, MD, FAHA, Chief Science and Medical
Ofﬁcer
Nicole Aiello Sapio, EdD, Executive Vice President,
Ofﬁce of Science Strategies and Operations
R a d h i k aR a j g o p a lS i n g h ,P h D ,S e n i o rV i c eP r e s i d e n t ,
Ofﬁce of Science and Medicine
Prashant Nedungadi, BPharm, PhD, National Vice
President, Science and Medicine, Clinical Guidelines
P a u lS t .L a u r e n t ,D N P ,R N ,N a t i o n a lV i c eP r e s i d e n t ,
Ofﬁce of Science and Medicine
Jody Hundley, Senior Production and Operations
Manager, Scienti ﬁcP u b l i c a t i o n s ,O f ﬁce of Science
OperationsRao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372206

REFERENCES
PREAMBLE
1.Committee on Standards for Systematic Reviews
of Comparitive Effectiveness Research, Institute ofMedicine (U.S.). Finding what works in healthcare:
standards for systematic reviews . National Acade-
mies Press; 2011 .
2.Anderson JL, Heidenreich PA, Barnett PG, et al.
ACC/AHA statement on cost/value methodology in
clinical practice guidelines and performance mea-sures: a report of the American College of Cardi-ology/American Heart Association Task Force onPerformance Measures and Task Force on PracticeGuidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;63:2304 –2322 .
3.ACCF/AHA Task Force on Practice Guidelines.
Methodology Manual and Policies From the ACCF/
AHA Task Force on Practice Guidelines. American
College of Cardiology and American Heart Associa-tion. 2010. Accessed June 3, 2024. https://www.
acc.org/-/media/Non-Clinical/Files-PDFs-Excel-MS-Word-etc/Guidelines/About-Guidelines-and-Clinical-Documents/Methodology/2014/Methodology-
Practice-Guidelines.pdf?la ¼en&hash ¼157B7835091
CF7856B26528717BE14B33BE8226F .https://
professional.heart.org/-/media/phd- ﬁles/guidelines-
and-statements/methodology_manual_and_policies_ucm_319826.pdf
4.Halperin JL, Levine GN, Al-Khatib SM, et al.
Further evolution of the ACC/AHA clinical practice
guideline recommendation classi ﬁcation system: a
report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on ClinicalPractice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2016;67:
1572 –1574 .
5.Arnett DK, Goodman RA, Halperin JL, et al. AHA/
ACC/HHS strategies to enhance application of
clinical practice guidelines in patients with cardio-
vascular disease and comorbid conditions: from theAmerican Heart Association, American College ofCardiology, and U.S. Department of Health andHuman Services. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;64:1851 –
1856 .
6.Levine GN, O ’Gara PT, Beckman JA, et al. Recent
innovations, modi ﬁcations, and evolution of ACC/
AHA clinical practice guidelines: an update for ourconstituencies: a report of the American College ofCardiology/American Heart Association Task Forceon Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2019;73:1990 –1998 .
1.4. Scope of the Guideline
1.O’Gara PT, Kushner FG, Ascheim DD, et al. 2013
ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of ST-
elevation myocardial infarction: a report of the
American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on PracticeGuidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2013;61:e78 –e140 .
2.Amsterdam EA, Wenger NK, Brindis RG, et al.
2014 AHA/ACC guideline for the management ofpatients with non-ST-elevation acute coronary
syndromes: a report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Forceon Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;64:
e139 –e228 .
3.
Levine GN, Bates ER, Blankenship JC, et al. 2015
ACC/AHA/SCAI Focused update on primary percu-taneous coronary intervention for patients withST-elevation myocardial infarction: an update of
the 2011 ACCF/AHA/SCAI guideline for percuta-
neous coronary intervention and the 2013 ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of ST-elevationmyocardial infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2016;67:
1235 –1250 .
4.Lawton JS, Tamis-Holland JE, Bangalor S, et al.
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI guideline for coronary arteryrevascularization: a report of the American Collegeof Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint
Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2022;79:e21 –e129 .
5.Levine GN, Bates ER, Bittl JA, et al. 2016 ACC/
AHA guideline focused update on duration of dualantiplatelet therapy in patients with coronary ar-tery disease: a report of the American College ofCardiology/American Heart Association Task Forceon Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2016;68:1082 –1115.
6.Martin SS, Aday AW, Almarzooq ZI, et al. 2024
Heart disease and stroke statistics: a report of US
and global data from the American Heart Associ-
ation. Circulation . 2024;149:e347 –e913 .
7.Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and
National Center for Health Statistics. National Healthand Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), 2017-2020. Accessed April 16, 2024. https://wwwn.cdc.
gov/nchs/nhanes/continuousnhanes/default.aspx?Cycle ¼2017-2020
8.Tsao CW, Aday AW, Almarzooq ZI, et al. Heart
disease and stroke statistics-2023 update: a report
from the American Heart Association. Circulation .
2023;147:e93 –e621 .
9.Roe MT, Messenger JC, Weintraub WS, et al.
Treatments, trends, and outcomes of acute
myocardial infarction and percutaneous coronaryintervention. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2010;56:254 –263.
10.Bishu KG, Lekoubou A, Kirkland E, et al. Esti-
mating the economic burden of acute myocardialinfarction in the US: 12 year national data. Am J
Med Sci . 2020;359:257 –265.
11.Cowper PA, Knight JD, Davidson-Ray L, et al.
Acute and 1-year hospitalization costs for acutemyocardial infarction treated with percutaneous
coronary intervention: results from the
TRANSLATE-ACS registry. J Am Heart Assoc .
2019;8:e011322 .
12.Chaudhry SI, Khan RF, Chen J, et al. National
trends in recurrent AMI hospitalizations 1 year afteracute myocardial infarction in Medicare bene ﬁ-
ciaries: 1999-2010. J Am Heart Assoc . 2014;3:
e001197 .
13.Brown TM, Deng L, Becker DJ, et al. Trends in
mortality and recurrent coronary heart diseaseevents after an acute myocardial infarction among
Medicare bene ﬁciaries, 2001-2009. Am Heart J .
2015;170:249 –255.
14.Graham G. Racial and ethnic differences in
acute coronary syndrome and myocardialinfarction within the United States: from de-
mographics to outcomes. Clin Cardiol . 2016;39:
299 –306.
15.Nadruz W Jr, Claggett B, Henglin M, et al.
Widening racial differences in risks for coronaryheart disease. Circulation . 2018;137:1195 –1197.
16.Nanna MG, Navar AM, Zakroysky P, et al. As-
sociation of patient perceptions of cardiovascularrisk and beliefs on statin drugs with racial differ-ences in statin use: insights from the Patient andProvider Assessment of Lipid Management Regis-try.JAMA Cardiol . 2018;3:739 –748.
17.Aggarwal R, Chiu N, Wadhera RK, et al. Racial/
ethnic disparities in hypertension prevalence,awareness, treatment, and control in the UnitedStates, 2013 to 2018. Hypertension . 2021;78:1719 –
1726 .
18.Golomb M, Redfors B, Crowley A, et al. Prog-
nostic impact of race in patients undergoing PCI:analysis from 10 randomized coronary stent trials.JACC Cardiovasc Interv . 2020;13:1586 –1595 .
19.Lewey J, Choudhry NK. The current state of
ethnic and racial disparities in cardiovascular care:lessons from the past and opportunities for thefuture. Curr Cardiol Rep . 2014;16:530 .
20.Khraishah H, Daher R, Garelnabi M, et al.
Sex, racial, and ethnic disparities in acute coro-nary syndrome: novel risk factors and recom-mendations for earlier diagnosis to improveoutcomes. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol .
2023;43:1369 –1383 .
21.Ferry AV, Anand A, Strachan FE, et al. Pre-
senting symptoms in men and women diagnosedwith myocardial infarction using sex-speci ﬁc
criteria. J Am Heart Assoc . 2019;8:e012307 .
22.Lichtman JH, Leifheit EC, Safdar B, et al. Sex
differences in the presentation and perception ofsymptoms among young patients with myocardialinfarction: evidence from the VIRGO study (Varia-
tion in Recovery: Role of Gender on Outcomes
of Young AMI Patients). Circulation . 2018;137:781 –
790.
23.van Oosterhout REM, de Boer AR, Maas A, et al.
Sex differences in symptom presentation in acute
coronary syndromes: a systematic review andmeta-analysis. J Am Heart Assoc . 2020;9:e014733 .
24.Canto JG, Goldberg RJ, Hand MM, et al.
Symptom presentation of women with acute cor-
onary syndromes: myth vs reality. Arch Intern Med .
2007;167:2405 –2413 .
25.Peters SAE, Colantonio LD, Zhao H, et al. Sex
differences in high-intensity statin use following
myocardial infarction in the United States.
JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2018;71:1729 –1737.
26.Koopman C, Vaartjes I, Heintjes EM, et al.
Persisting gender differences and attenuating age
differences in cardiovascular drug use for preven-
tion and treatment of coronary heart disease,1998-2010. Eur Heart J . 2013;34:3198 –3205 .
27.Peters SAE, Muntner P, Woodward M. Sex dif-
ferences in the prevalence of, and trends in, car-
diovascular risk factors, treatment, and control inJACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2207

the United States, 2001 to 2016. Circulation . 2019;139:
1025 –1035 .
28.Sorensen NA, Neumann JT, Ojeda F, et al.
Relations of sex to diagnosis and outcomes in acutecoronary syndrome. J Am Heart Assoc . 2018;7:
e007297 .
29.Sarma AA, Braunwald E, Cannon CP, et al. Out-
comes of women compared with men after non-ST-
segment elevation acute coronary syndromes. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2019;74:3013 –3022 .
30.Grundy SM, Stone NJ, Bailey AL, et al. 2018
AHA/ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/ADA/AGS/APhA/ASPC/NLA/PCNA guideline on the management ofblood cholesterol: a report of the American College ofCardiology/American Heart Association Task Force onClinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;73:
e285 –e350 .
31.Whelton PK, Carey RM, Aronow WS, et al.
2017 ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/
ASPC/NMA/PCNA guideline for the prevention, detec-tion, evaluation, and management of high bloodpressure in adults: a report of the American College ofCardiology/American Heart Association Task Force onClinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2018;71:
e127 –e248 .
32.Arnett DK, Blumenthal RS, Albert MA, et al. 2019
ACC/AHA guideline on the primary prevention of car-
diovascular disease: a report of the American Collegeof Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Forceon Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2019;74:177 –232.
33.Gulati M, Levy PD, Mukherjee D, et al. 2021 AHA/
ACC/ASE/CHEST/SAEM/SCCT/SCMR guideline for theevaluation and diagnosis of chest pain: a report of the
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Asso-
ciation Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2021;78:e187 –e285 .
34.Kleindorfer DO, Tow ﬁghi A, Chaturvedi S, et al.
2021 Guideline for the prevention of stroke in patientswith stroke and transient ischemic attack: a guidelinefrom the American Heart Association/American StrokeAssociation. Stroke . 2021;52:e364 –e467 .
35.Heidenreich PA, Bozkurt B, Aguilar D, et al. 2022
AHA/ACC/HFSA guideline for the management of heartfailure: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clin-ical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2022;79:
e263 –e421 .
36.Virani SS, Newby LK, Arnold SV, et al. 2023 AHA/
ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA guideline for the man-agement of patients with chronic coronary disease: areport of the American Heart Association/AmericanCollege of Cardiology Joint Committee on Clinical
Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2023;82:833 –
955.
37.Joglar JA, Chung MK, Armbruster AL, et al.
2023 ACC/AHA/ACCP/HRS guideline for the diag-nosis and management of atrial ﬁbrillation: a
report of the American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association Joint Committee onClinical Practice Guidelines. JA mC o l lC a r d i o l .
2024;83:109 –
279.
38.Thomas RJ, Beatty AL, Beckie TM, et al. Home-
based cardiac rehabilitation: a scienti ﬁc statement
from the American Association of Cardiovascular andPulmonary Rehabilitation, the American Heart Associ-ation, and the American College of Cardiology. Circu-
lation . 2019;140:e69 –e89.39.Baran DA, Grines CL, Bailey S, et al. SCAI clinical
expert consensus statement on the classi ﬁcation of
cardiogenic shock. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv .
2019;94:29 –37.
40.Tamis-Holland JE, Jneid H, Reynolds HR, et al.
Contemporary diagnosis and management of patientswith myocardial infarction in the absence of obstruc-
tive coronary artery disease: a scienti ﬁc statement
from the American Heart Association. Circulation .
2019;139:e891 –e908 .
41.Henry TD, Tomey MI, Tamis-Holland JE, et al.
Invasive management of acute myocardial infarctioncomplicated by cardiogenic shock: a scienti ﬁc state-
ment from the American Heart Association. Circulation .
2021;143:e815 –e829 .
42.Damluji AA, van Diepen S, Katz JN, et al. Me-
chanical complications of acute myocardial infarction: a
scienti ﬁc statement from the American Heart Associa-
tion. Circulation . 2021;144:e16 –e35.
43.Naidu SS, Baran DA, Jentzer JC, et al. SCAI SHOCK
stage classi ﬁcation expert consensus update: a review
and incorporation of validation studies. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2022;79:933 –946.
44.Levine GN, McEvoy JW, Fang JC, et al.
Management of patients at risk for and with left ven-tricular thrombus: a scienti ﬁc statement from the
American Heart Association. Circulation . 2022;146:
e205 –e223 .
45.Tamis-Holland JE, Menon V, Johnson NJ, et al.
Cardiac catheterization laboratory management of thecomatose adult patient with an out-of-hospital cardiacarrest: a scienti ﬁc statement from the American Heart
Association. Circulation . 2024;149:e274 –e295 .
1.5. Class of Recommendation and Level of Evidence
1.ACCF/AHA Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Meth-
odology Manual and Policies From the ACCF/AHA Task
Force on Practice Guidelines. American College of Car-
diology and American Heart Association . 2010. Accessed
June 3, 2024. https://www.acc.org/-/media/Non-
Clinical/Files-PDFs-Excel-MS-Word-etc/Guidelines/About-Guidelines-and-Clinical-Documents/Methodology/
2014/Methodology-Practice-Guidelines.pdf?la ¼en&hash ¼
157B7835091CF7856B26528717BE14B33BE8226F .
https://professional.heart.org/-/media/phd- ﬁles/
guidelines-and-statements/methodology_manual_and_policies_ucm_319826.pdf
2.1. De ﬁnition and Classi ﬁcation of ACS
1.Libby P. Mechanisms of acute coronary syndromes
and their implications for therapy. N Engl J Med .
2013;368:2004 –2013 .
2.Falk E, Nakano M, Bentzon JF, et al. Update on acute
coronary syndromes: the pathologists ’view. Eur Heart
J. 2013;34:719 –728.
3.Bhatt DL, Lopes RD, Harrington RA. Diagnosis and
treatment of acute coronary syndromes: a review.JAMA . 2022;327:662 –675.
4.Thygesen K, Alpert JS, Jaffe AS, et al. Fourth uni-
versal de ﬁnition of myocardial infarction (2018). JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2018;72:2231 –2264 .
5.Gulati M, Levy PD, Mukherjee D, et al. 2021 AHA/
ACC/ASE/CHEST/SAEM/SCCT/SCMR guideline for the
evaluation and diagnosis of chest pain: a report of theAmerican College of Cardiology/American Heart Asso-ciation Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2021;78:e187 –e285 .6.Hayes SN, Kim ESH, Saw J, et al. Spontaneous
coronary artery dissection: current state of thescience: a scienti ﬁc statement from the American
Heart Association. Circulation .2 0 1 8 ; 1 3 7 : e 5 2 3 –
e557 .
7.Tamis-Holland JE, Jneid H, Reynolds HR, et al.
Contemporary diagnosis and management of patients
with myocardial infarction in the absence of obstruc-
tive coronary artery disease: a scienti ﬁc statement
from the American Heart Association. Circulation .
2019;139:e891 –e908 .
8.DeFilippis AP, Chapman AR, Mills NL, et al. Assess-
ment and treatment of patients with type 2 myocardialinfarction and acute nonischemic myocardial injury.Circulation . 2019;140:1661 –1678 .
9.Jernberg T, Hasvold P, Henriksson M, et al. Cardio-
vascular risk in post-myocardial infarction patients:
nationwide real world data demonstrate the impor-tance of a long-term perspective. Eur Heart J . 2015;36:
1163 –1170 .
10.Virani SS, Newby LK, Arnold SV, et al. 2023 AHA/
ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA guideline for the man-agement of patients with chronic coronary disease: areport of the American Heart Association/American
College of Cardiology Joint Committee on Clinical
Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2023;82:833 –
955.
11.Kontos MC, de Lemos JA, Deitelzweig SB, et al.
2022 ACC expert consensus decision pathway on theevaluation and disposition of acute chest pain in theemergency department: a report of the AmericanCollege of Cardiology Solution Set Oversight Commit-
tee. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2022;80:1925 –1960 .
12.Wang K, Asinger RW, Marriott HJ. ST-segment
elevation in conditions other than acute myocardial
infarction. N Engl J Med . 2003;349:2128 –2135 .
13.Birnbaum Y, Ye Y, Smith SW, Jneid H. Rapid diag-
nosis of stemi equivalent in patients with left bundle-branch block: Is it feasible? J Am Heart Assoc .
2021;10:e023275 .
3.1.1. Prehospital Assessment and Management
Considerations for Suspected ACS
1.Nakashima T, Hashiba K, Kikuchi M, et al. Impact of
prehospital 12-lead electrocardiography and destina-
tion hospital noti ﬁcation on mortality in patients with
chest pain- a systematic review. Circ Rep . 2022;4:187 –
193.
2.Quinn T, Johnsen S, Gale CP, et al. Effects of pre-
hospital 12-lead ECG on processes of care and mor-tality in acute coronary syndrome: a linked cohortstudy from the Myocardial Ischaemia National AuditProject. Heart . 2014;100:944 –950.
3.Verbeek PR, Ryan D, Turner L, Craig AM.
Serial prehospital 12-lead electrocardiograms in-
crease identi ﬁcation of ST-segment elevation
myocardial infarction. Prehosp Emerg Care .2 0 1 2 ; 1 6 :
109 –114.
4.Tanguay A, Lebon J, Lau L, et al. Detection of STEMI
using prehospital serial 12-lead electrocardiograms.Prehosp Emerg Care . 2018;22:419 –426.
5.Rokos IC, French WJ, Koenig WJ, et al. Integration of
pre-hospital electrocardiograms and ST-elevationmyocardial infarction receiving center (SRC) net-works: impact on door-to-balloon times across 10 in-dependent regions. JACC Cardiovasc Interv . 2009;2:
339–346.Rao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372208

6.Sorensen JT, Terkelsen CJ, Norgaard BL, et al.
Urban and rural implementation of pre-hospital diag-nosis and direct referral for primary percutaneouscoronary intervention in patients with acute ST-
elevation myocardial infarction. Eur Heart J . 2011;32:
430 –436.
7.Le May MR, Wells GA, So DY, et al. Reduction in
mortality as a result of direct transport from the ﬁeld
to a receiving center for primary percutaneous coro-nary intervention. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2012;60:1223 –
1230 .
8.Nam J, Caners K, Bowen JM, et al. Systematic re-
view and meta-analysis of the bene ﬁts of out-of-
hospital 12-lead ECG and advance noti ﬁcation in ST-
segment elevation myocardial infarction patients.Ann Emerg Med . 2014;64:176 –186, 186.e171-179 .
9.Shavadia JS, Roe MT, Chen AY, et al. Association
between cardiac catheterization laboratory pre-activation and reperfusion timing metrics and out-
comes in patients with ST-segment elevation
myocardial infarction undergoing primary percuta-neous coronary intervention: a report from the ACTIONregistry. JACC Cardiovasc Interv . 2018;11:1837 –1847 .
10.Gulati M, Levy PD, Mukherjee D, et al. 2021 AHA/
ACC/ASE/CHEST/SAEM/SCCT/SCMR guideline for theevaluation and diagnosis of chest pain: a report of theAmerican College of Cardiology/American Heart As-sociation Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guide-
lines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2021;78:e187 –e285 .
11.Jollis JG, Al-Khalidi HR, Roettig ML, et al. Impact of
regionalization of ST-segment-elevation myocardial
infarction care on treatment times and outcomes for
emergency medical services: transported patientspresenting to hospitals with percutaneous coronaryintervention: Mission: Lifeline Accelerator-2. Circula-
tion. 2018;137:376 –387.
12.Mathews R, Peterson ED, Li S, et al. Use of emer-
gency medical service transport among patients withST-segment-elevation myocardial infarction: ﬁndings
from the National Cardiovascular Data Registry Acute
Coronary Treatment Intervention Outcomes Network
Registry-Get With The Guidelines. Circulation .
2011;124:154 –163.
13.Becker L, Larsen MP, Eisenberg MS. Incidence of
cardiac arrest during self-transport for chest pain. Ann
Emerg Med . 1996;28:612 –616.
14.Herlitz J, Hansson E, Ringvall E, et al. Predicting a
life-threatening disease and death among ambulance-transported patients with chest pain or other symp-toms raising suspicion of an acute coronary syndrome.Am J Emerg Med . 2002;20:588 –594.
15.Rosell-Ortiz F, Mellado-Vergel FJ, Fernández-
Valle P, et al. Initial complications and factors relatedto prehospital mortality in acute myocardial infarctionwith ST segment elevation. Emerg Med J . 2015;32:
559–
563.
16.Le May MR, So DY, Dionne R, et al. A citywide pro-
tocol for primary PCI in ST-segment elevation myocardial
infarction. N Engl J Med . 2008;358:231 –240.
17.Tanaka A, Matsuo K, Kikuchi M, et al. Systematic
review and meta-analysis of diagnostic accuracy to
identify ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction on
interpretations of prehospital electrocardiograms. Circ
Rep. 2022;4:289 –297.
18.Keeley E, Boura JA, Grines CL. Primary angioplasty
versus intravenous thrombolytic therapy for acutemyocardial infarction: a quantitative review of 23
randomised trials. Lancet . 2003;361:13 –20.
19.De Luca G, Suryapranata H, Ottervanger JP,
Antman EM. Time delay to treatment and mortality in
primary angioplasty for acute myocardial infarction:every minute of delay counts. Circulation . 2004;109:
1223 –1225 .
20.McNamara RL, Wang Y, Herrin J, et al. Effect of
door-to-balloon time on mortality in patients with ST-
segment elevation myocardial infarction. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2006;47:2180 –2186 .
21.De Luca G, Biondi-Zoccai G, Marino P. Transferring
patients with ST-segment elevation myocardialinfarction for mechanical reperfusion: a meta-
regression analysis of randomized trials. Ann Emerg
Med. 2008;52:665 –676.
22.Andersen HR, Nielsen TT, Rasmussen K, et al.
A comparison of coronary angioplasty with ﬁbrinolytic
therapy in acute myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med .
2003;349:733 –742.
23.Widimsky P, Budesinsky T, Vorac D, et al. Long
distance transport for primary angioplasty vs imme-diate thrombolysis in acute myocardial infarction. Finalresults of the randomized national multicentre trial
PRAGUE-2. Eur Heart J . 2003;24:94 –104.
24.Fordyce CB, Al-Khalidi HR, Jollis JG, et al. Asso-
ciation of rapid care process implementation onreperfusion times across multiple ST-segment-elevation myocardial infarction networks. Circ Car-
diovasc Interv . 2017;10:e004061 .
25.Savage ML, Poon KK, Johnston EM, et al. Pre-
hospital ambulance noti ﬁcation and initiation of
treatment of ST elevation myocardial infarction isassociated with signi ﬁcant reduction in door-to-
balloon time for primary PCI. Heart Lung Circ .
2014;23:435 –443.
3.1.2 Initial In-Hospital Assessment of Patients With
Conﬁrmed or Suspected ACS
1.Diercks DB, Peacock WF, Hiestand BC, et al. Fre-
quency and consequences of recording an electrocar-diogram >10 minutes after arrival in an emergency
room in non-ST-segment elevation acute coronary
syndromes (from the CRUSADE Initiative). Am J Car-
diol. 2006;97:437 –442.
2.Diercks DB, Kontos MC, Chen AY, et al. Utilization
and impact of pre-hospital electrocardiograms for
patients with acute ST-segment elevation myocardial
infarction: data from the NCDR (National Cardiovas-cular Data Registry) ACTION (Acute Coronary Treat-ment and Intervention Outcomes Network) Registry.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2009;53:161 –166.
3.Riley RF, Newby LK, Don CW, et al. Diagnostic time
course, treatment, and in-hospital outcomes for pa-
tients with ST-segment elevation myocardial infarctionpresenting with nondiagnostic initial electrocardio-gram: a report from the American Heart AssociationMission: Lifeline program. Am Heart J . 2013;165:50 –
56.
4.Lipinski MJ, Baker NC, Escarcega RO, et al. Com-
parison of conventional and high-sensitivity troponinin patients with chest pain: a collaborative meta-analysis. Am Heart J . 2015;169:6 –16.e16 .
5.Anand A, Lee KK, Chapman AR, et al. High-sensi-
tivity cardiac troponin on presentation to rule outmyocardial infarction: a stepped-wedge clusterrandomized controlled trial. Circulation . 2021;143:
2214 –2224 .
6.Shah ASV, Anand A, Strachan FE, et al. High-sensi-
tivity troponin in the evaluation of patients with sus-pected acute coronary syndrome: a stepped-wedge,
cluster-randomised controlled trial. Lancet . 2018;392:
919–928.
7.Reichlin T, Hochholzer W, Bassetti S, et al. Early
diagnosis of myocardial infarction with sensitive car-diac troponin assays. N Engl J Med . 2009;361:858 –
867.
8.Chew DP, Lambrakis K, Blyth A, et al.
A randomized trial of a 1-hour troponin T protocol insuspected acute coronary syndromes: the Rapid
Assessment of Possible Acute Coronary Syndrome in
the Emergency Department With High-SensitivityTroponin T Study (RAPID-TnT). Circulation . 2019;
140:1543 –1556 .
9.Neumann JT, Sörensen NA, Rübsamen N, et al.
Evaluation of a new ultra-sensitivity troponin I assay inpatients with suspected myocardial infarction. Int J
Cardiol . 2019;283:35 –40.
10.Boeddinghaus J, Nestelberger T, Twerenbold R,
et al. Direct comparison of 4 very early rule-out stra-
tegies for acute myocardial infarction using high-sensitivity cardiac troponin I. Circulation . 2017;135:
1597 –1611.
11.Twerenbold R, Costabel JP, Nestelberger T, et al.
Outcome of applying the ESC 0/1-hour algorithm inpatients with suspected myocardial infarction. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2019;74:483 –494.
12.Badertscher P, Boeddinghaus J, Twerenbold R,
et al. Direct comparison of the 0/1h and 0/3h algo-
rithms for early rule-out of acute myocardial infarc-
tion. Circulation . 2018;137:2536 –2538 .
13.Gulati M, Levy PD, Mukherjee D, et al. 2021 AHA/
ACC/ASE/CHEST/SAEM/SCCT/SCMR guideline for theevaluation and diagnosis of chest pain: a report of theAmerican College of Cardiology/American Heart As-sociation Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guide-lines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2021;78:e187 –e285 .
14.National Center for Health Statistics. Emergency
Department Visits in the United States, 2016-2021.
Accessed August 6, 2023. https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/
dhcs/ed-visits/index.htm
15.Thygesen K, Alpert JS, Jaffe AS, et al. Fourth uni-
versal de ﬁnition of myocardial infarction (2018). Eur
Heart J . 2019;40:237 –269.
16.Mahler SA, Riley RF, Hiestand BC, et al. The HEART
Pathway randomized trial: identifying emergencydepartment patients with acute chest pain for earlydischarge. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes . 2015;8:195 –
203.
17.Than MP, Pickering JW, Aldous SJ, et al. Effec-
tiveness of EDACS versus ADAPT accelerated diag-
nostic pathways for chest pain: a pragmaticrandomized controlled trial embedded within practice.Ann Emerg Med . 2016;68:93 –102.e101 .
18.Twerenbold R, Neumann JT, Sörensen NA, et al.
Prospective validation of the 0/1-h Algorithm forearly diagnosis of myocardial infarction. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2018;72:620 –632.
19.Mark DG, Huang J, Chettipally U, et al. Perfor-
mance of coronary risk scores among patients with
chest pain in the emergency department. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2018;71:606 –616.JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2209

20.Puymirat E, Simon T, Steg PG, et al. Association of
changes in clinical characteristics and managementwith improvement in survival among patients with ST-elevation myocardial infarction. JAMA . 2012;308:998 –
1006 .
21.Thygesen K, Alpert JS, Jaffe AS, et al. Fourth uni-
versal de ﬁnition of myocardial infarction (2018). JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2018;72:2231 –2264 .
22.Lopez-Sendon J, Coma-Canella I, Alcasena S, et al.
Electrocardiographic ﬁndings in acute right ventricular
infarction: sensitivity and speci ﬁcity of electrocardio-
graphic alterations in right precordial leads V4R, V3R,V1, V2, and V3. J Am Coll Cardiol . 1985;6:1273 –1279 .
23.Apple FS, Wu AH, Jaffe AS, et al. National Academy
of Clinical Biochemistry and IFCC Committee forStandardization of Markers of Cardiac Damage Labo-ratory Medicine practice guidelines: analytical issuesfor biomarkers of heart failure. Circulation . 2007;116:
e95–e98.
24.Morrow DA, Cannon CP, Jesse RL, et al. National
Academy of Clinical Biochemistry Laboratory Medicine
practice guidelines: clinical characteristics and utiliza-
tion of biochemical markers in acute coronary syn-dromes. Circulation . 2007;115:e356 –e375 .
25.Cullen L, Mueller C, Parsonage WA, et al. Valida-
tion of high-sensitivity troponin I in a 2-hour diag-nostic strategy to assess 30-day outcomes inemergency department patients with possible acutecoronary syndrome. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2013;62:1242 –
1249 .
26.Twerenbold R, Badertscher P, Boeddinghaus J,
et al. Effect of the FDA regulatory approach on the 0/
1-h algorithm for rapid diagnosis of MI. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2017;70:1532 –1534 .
27.Chiang CH, Chiang CH, Lee GH, et al. Safety and
efﬁcacy of the European Society of Cardiology 0/1-
hour algorithm for diagnosis of myocardial infarction:systematic review and meta-analysis. Heart .
2020;106:985 –991.
28.Reichlin T, Schindler C, Drexler B, et al. One-hour
rule-out and rule-in of acute myocardial infarctionusing high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T. Arch Intern
Med. 2012;172:1211 –1218.
29.Allen BR, Christenson RH, Cohen SA, et al. Diag-
nostic performance of high-sensitivity cardiac troponinT strategies and clinical variables in a multisite US
cohort. Circulation . 2021;143:1659 –1672 .
30.
Karady J, Morrow DA. Critical appraisal of the
negative predictive performance of the European So-
ciety of Cardiology 0/1-hour algorithm for evaluatingpatients with chest pain in the US. JAMA Cardiol .
2023;8:314 –316.
31.Keller T, Zeller T, Peetz D, et al. Sensitive troponin I
assay in early diagnosis of acute myocardial infarction.N Engl J Med . 2009;361:868 –877.
32.Sandoval Y, Apple FS, Mahler SA, et al. High-
sensitivity cardiac troponin and the 2021 AHA/ACC/ASE/CHEST/SAEM/SCCT/SCMR guidelines for theevaluation and diagnosis of acute chest pain. Circula-
tion. 2022;146:569 –581.
3.1.3. Risk Strati ﬁcation Tools for Patients With
STEMI and NSTE-ACS
1.Brilakis ES, Wright RS, Kopecky SL, et al. Association
of the PURSUIT risk score with predischarge ejection
fraction, angiographic severity of coronary arterydisease, and mortality in a nonselected, community-
based population with non-ST-elevation acutemyocardial infarction. Am Heart J . 2003;146:811 –818.
2.Backus BE, Six AJ, Kelder JH, et al. Risk scores for
patients with chest pain: evaluation in the emergency
department. Curr Cardiol Rev . 2011;7:2 –8.
3.Gale CP, Manda SO, Weston CF, et al. Evaluation
of risk scores for risk strati ﬁcation of acute coronary
syndromes in the Myocardial Infarction NationalAudit Project (MINAP) database. Heart . 2009;95:221 –
227.
4.Antman EM, Cohen M, Bernink PJ, et al. The TIMI
risk score for unstable angina/non-ST elevation MI: a
method for prognostication and therapeutic decisionmaking. JAMA . 2000;284:835 –842.
5.Morrow DA, Antman EM, Charlesworth A, et al. TIMI
risk score for ST-elevation myocardial infarction: aconvenient, bedside, clinical score for risk assessmentat presentation: an intravenous nPA for treatment of
infarcting myocardium early II trial substudy. Circula-
tion. 2000;102:2031 –2037 .
6.Fox KA, Dabbous OH, Goldberg RJ, et al. Prediction
of risk of death and myocardial infarction in the sixmonths after presentation with acute coronary syn-drome: prospective multinational observational study(GRACE). BMJ. 2006;333:1091 .
7.Fox KA, Fitzgerald G, Puymirat E, et al. Should pa-
tients with acute coronary disease be strati ﬁed for
management according to their risk? Derivation,external validation and outcomes using the updatedGRACE risk score. BMJ Open . 2014;4:e004425 .
8.Chew DP, Junbo G, Parsonage W, et al. Perceived
risk of ischemic and bleeding events in acute coronary
syndromes. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes . 2013;6:
299
–308.
9.Chew DP, Hyun K, Morton E, et al. Objective risk
assessment vs standard care for acute coronary syn-dromes: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Cardiol .
2021;6:304 –313.
10.Gale CP, Stocken DD, Aktaa S, et al. Effectiveness
of GRACE risk score in patients admitted to hospital
with non-ST elevation acute coronary syndrome
(UKGRIS): parallel group cluster randomisedcontrolled trial. BMJ. 2023;381:e073843 .
11.Killip TIII, Kimball JT. Treatment of myocardial
infarction in a coronary care unit. A two year experi-ence with 250 patients. Am J Cardiol . 1967;20:457 –
464.
12.Araujo GN, Silveira AD, Scolari FL, et al. Admission
bedside lung ultrasound reclassi ﬁes mortality predic-
tion in patients with ST-segment-elevation myocardialinfarction. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging . 2020;13:e010269 .
13.Lindner M, Lindsey A, Bain PA, et al. Prevalence
and prognostic importance of lung ultrasound ﬁndings
in acute coronary syndrome: a systematic review.
Echocardiography . 2021;38:2069 –2076 .
14.van Diepen S, Chen AY, Wang TY, et al. In ﬂuence of
heart failure symptoms and ejection fraction on short-and long-term outcomes for older patients with non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction. Am
Heart J . 2014;167:267 –273.e261 .
15.Lewis EF, Velazquez EJ, Solomon SD, et al. Pre-
dictors of the ﬁrst heart failure hospitalization in pa-
tients who are stable survivors of myocardial infarction
complicated by pulmonary congestion and/or leftventricular dysfunction: a VALIANT study. Eur Heart J .
2008;29:748 –756.
16.Neumann JT, Twerenbold R, Ojeda F, et al. Appli-
cation of High-sensitivity troponin in suspectedmyocardial infarction. N Engl J Med . 2019;380:2529 –
2540 .
17.Aviles RJ, Askari AT, Lindahl B, et al. Troponin T
levels in patients with acute coronary syndromes, withor without renal dysfunction. N Engl J Med . 2002;346:
2047 –2052 .
18.Morrow DA, Cannon CP, Rifai N, et al. Ability of
minor elevations of troponins I and T to predict bene ﬁt
from an early invasive strategy in patients with un-
stable angina and non-ST elevation myocardial
infarction: results from a randomized trial. JAMA .
2001;286:2405
–2412 .
19.Scirica BM, Sabatine MS, Jarolim P, et al. Assess-
ment of multiple cardiac biomarkers in non-ST-segment elevation acute coronary syndromes: obser-vations from the MERLIN-TIMI 36 trial. Eur Heart J .
2011;32:697 –705.
20.Jering KS, Claggett BL, Pfeffer MA, et al. Prog-
nostic importance of NT-proBNP (N-terminal pro-B-
type natriuretic peptide) following high-risk myocar-dial infarction in the PARADISE-MI trial. Circ Heart Fail .
2023;16:e010259 .
21.Rab T, Ratanapo S, Kern KB, et al. Cardiac shock
care centers: JACC review topic of the week. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2018;72:1972 –1980 .
22.Henry TD, Tomey MI, Tamis-Holland JE, et al.
Invasive management of acute myocardial infarction
complicated by cardiogenic shock: a scienti ﬁc state-
ment from the American Heart Association. Circulation .
2021;143:e815 –e829 .
23.Naidu SS, Baran DA, Jentzer JC, et al. SCAI SHOCK
stage classi ﬁcation expert consensus update: a review
and incorporation of validation studies. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2022;79:933 –946.
3.2. Management of Patients Presenting With
Cardiac Arrest
1.Wnent J, Seewald S, Heringlake M, et al. Choice of
hospital after out-of-hospital cardiac arrest-a decisionwith far-reaching consequences: a study in a largeGerman city. Crit Care . 2012;16:R164 .
2.Kragholm K, Malta Hansen C, Dupre ME, et al. Direct
transport to a percutaneous cardiac intervention cen-
ter and outcomes in patients with out-of-hospital
cardiac arrest. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes .
2017;10:e003414 .
3.Gorjup V, Radsel P, Kocjancic ST, et al. Acute ST-
elevation myocardial infarction after successful car-diopulmonary resuscitation. Resuscitation . 2007;72:
379–385.
4.Pareek N, Beckley-Hoelscher N, Kanyal R, et al.
MIRACLE(2) score and SCAI grade to identify patients
with out-of-hospital cardiac arrest for immediate cor-onary angiography. JACC Cardiovasc Interv . 2022;15:
1074 –1084 .
5.Garot P, Lefevre T, Eltchaninoff H, et al. Six-month
outcome of emergency percutaneous coronary inter-vention in resuscitated patients after cardiac arrestcomplicating ST-elevation myocardial infarction. Cir-
culation . 2007;115:1354 –1362 .
6.Hosmane VR, Mustafa NG, Reddy VK, et al. Survival
and neurologic recovery in patients with ST-segmentRao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372210

elevation myocardial infarction resuscitated from car-
diac arrest. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2009;53:409 –415.
7.Bougouin W, Dumas F, Karam N, et al. Should we
perform an immediate coronary angiogram in all pa-tients after cardiac arrest?: Insights from a large
French registry. JACC Cardiovasc Interv . 2018;11:249 –
256.
8.Lemkes JS, Janssens GN, van der Hoeven NW, et al.
Coronary angiography after cardiac arrest without STsegment elevation: one-year outcomes of the COACTrandomized clinical trial. JAMA Cardiol . 2020;5:1358 –
1365 .
9.Kern KB, Radsel P, Jentzer JC, et al. Randomized
pilot clinical trial of early coronary angiography versusno early coronary angiography after cardiac arrestwithout ST-segment elevation: the PEARL study. Cir-
culation . 2020;142:2002 –2012 .
10.Desch S, Freund A, Akin I, et al. Angiography after
out-of-hospital cardiac arrest without ST-segment
elevation. N Engl J Med . 2021;385:2544 –2553 .
11.Hauw-Berlemont C, Lamhaut L, Diehl J-L, et al.
Emergency vs delayed coronary angiogram in survivorsof out-of-hospital cardiac arrest: results of the ran-domized, multicentric EMERGE trial. JAMA Cardiol .
2022;7:700 –707.
12.Elfwen L, Lagedal R, Nordberg P, et al. Direct or
subacute coronary angiography in out-of-hospital
cardiac arrest (DISCO)-An initial pilot-study of a ran-
domized clinical trial. Resuscitation . 2019;139:253 –261.
13.Viana-Tejedor A, Andrea-Riba R, Scardino C, et al.
Coronary angiography in patients without ST-segmentelevation following out-of-hospital cardiac arrest.COUPE clinical trial. Rev Esp Cardiol (Engl Ed) .
2023;76:94 –102.
14.Lemkes JS, Janssens GN, van der Hoeven NW, et al.
Coronary angiography after cardiac arrest without ST-segment elevation. N Engl J Med . 2019;380:1397 –
1407 .
15.Kragholm K, Lu D, Chiswell K, et al. Improvement
in care and outcomes for emergency medical service-transported patients with ST-elevation myocardial
infarction (STEMI) with and without prehospital car-
diac arrest: a Mission: Lifeline STEMI Acceleratorstudy. J Am Heart Assoc . 2017;6:e005717 .
16.Myat A, Song KJ, Rea T. Out-of-hospital
cardiac arrest: current concepts. Lancet . 2018;391:
970 –979.
17.Kern KB, Lotun K, Patel N, et al. Outcomes of
comatose cardiac arrest survivors with and without ST-
segment elevation myocardial infarction: importanceof coronary angiography. JACC Cardiovasc Interv .
2015;8:1031 –1040 .
18.Henry TD, Tomey MI, Tamis-Holland JE, et al.
Invasive management of acute myocardial infarctioncomplicated by cardiogenic shock: a scienti ﬁc state-
ment from the American Heart Association. Circulation .
2021;143:e815 –e829 .
19.Tamis-Holland JE, Menon V, Johnson NJ, et al.
Cardiac catheterization laboratory management of thecomatose adult patient with an out-of-hospital cardiacarrest: a scienti ﬁc statement from the American Heart
Association. Circulation . 2024;149:e274 –e295 .
20.Patterson T, Perkins GD, Perkins A, et al. Expedited
transfer to a cardiac arrest centre for non-ST-elevation
out-of-hospital cardiac arrest (ARREST): a UKprospective, multicentre, parallel, randomised clinical
trial. Lancet . 2023;402:1329 –1337.
21.Adrie C, Cariou A, Mourvillier B, et al. Predicting
survival with good neurological recovery at hospitaladmission after successful resuscitation of out-of-hospital cardiac arrest: the OHCA score. Eur Heart J .
2006;27:2840 –2845 .
22.Gue YX, Sayers M, Whitby BT, et al. Usefulness of
the NULL-PLEASE score to predict survival in Out-of-Hospital Cardiac Arrest (OCHA). Am J Med . 2020;133:
1328 –1335 .
23.Nishikimi M, Ogura T, Nishida K, et al. External
validation of a risk classi ﬁcation at the emergency
department of post-cardiac arrest syndrome patientsundergoing targeted temperature management.Resuscitation . 2019;140:135 –141.
24.Martinell L, Nielsen N, Herlitz J, et al. Early pre-
dictors of poor outcome after out-of-hospital cardiacarrest. Crit Care . 2017;21:96 .
25.Rab T, Kern KB, Tamis-Holland JE, et al. Cardiac
arrest. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2015;66:62 –73.
26.Harhash AA, May TL, Hsu C-H, et al. Risk strati ﬁ-
cation among survivors of cardiac arrest considered for
coronary angiography. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2021;77:360 –
371.
27.Maupain C, Bougouin W, Lamhaut L, et al. The
CAHP (Cardiac Arrest Hospital Prognosis) score: a tool
for risk strati ﬁcation after out-of-hospital cardiac ar-
rest. Eur Heart J . 2015;37:3222 –
3228 .
28.Bougouin W, Dumas F, Karam N, et al. Should we
perform an immediate coronary angiogram in all pa-
tients after cardiac arrest? JACC Cardiovasc Interv .
2018;11:249 –256.
29.LotﬁA, Klein LW, Hira RS, et al. SCAI expert
consensus statement on out of hospital cardiac arrest.Catheter Cardiovasc Interv . 2020;96:844 –861.
30.Byrne RA, Rossello X, Coughlan JJ, et al. 2023 ESC
guidelines for the management of acute coronarysyndromes. Eur Heart J . 2023;44:3720 –3826 .
31.Bavishi C, Trivedi V, Bhatt DL. Meta-analysis of
early versus delayed or selective coronary angiographyin patients with out-of-hospital cardiac arrest withoutST-elevation myocardial infarction. Am J Cardiol .
2022;175:180 –182.
4.1. Oxygen Therapy
1.Sukumalchantra Y, Levy S, Danzig R, et al. Correct-
ing arterial hypoxemia by oxygen therapy in patients
with acute myocardial infarction. Effect on ventilation
and hemodynamics. Am J Cardiol . 1969;24:838 –852.
2.Hofmann R, James SK, Jernberg T, et al. Oxygen
therapy in suspected acute myocardial infarction.
N Engl J Med . 2017;377:1240 –1249 .
3.Stub D, Smith K, Bernard S, et al. Air versus oxygen
in ST-segment-elevation myocardial infarction. Circu-
lation . 2015;131:2143 –2150 .
4.Khoshnood A, Carlsson M, Akbarzadeh M, et al.
Effect of oxygen therapy on myocardial salvage in STelevation myocardial infarction: the randomized SOC-CER trial. Eur J Emerg Med . 2018;25:78 –84.
5.Beasley R, Aldington S, Weatherall M, et al. Oxygen
therapy in myocardial infarction: an historicalperspective. J R Soc Med . 2007;100:130 –133.
6.Stewart RAH, Jones P, Dicker B, et al. High ﬂow
oxygen and risk of mortality in patients with asuspected acute coronary syndrome: pragmatic, clus-
ter randomised, crossover trial. BMJ (Clinical research
ed). 2021;372. n355-n355 .
7.Chu DK, Kim LH, Young PJ, et al. Mortality and
morbidity in acutely ill adults treated with liberal
versus conservative oxygen therapy (IOTA): a sys-
tematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet . 2018;391:
1693
–1705 .
8.Yu Y, Wang J, Wang Q, et al. Admission oxygen
saturation and all-cause in-hospital mortality in acutemyocardial infarction patients: data from the MIMIC-IIIdatabase. Ann Transl Med . 2020;8:1371 .
9.Hofmann R, Witt N, Lagerqvist B, et al. Oxygen
therapy in ST-elevation myocardial infarction. Eur
Heart J . 2018;39:2730 –2739 .
10.James SK, Erlinge D, Herlitz J, et al. Effect of ox-
ygen therapy on cardiovascular outcomes in relation tobaseline oxygen saturation. JACC Cardiovasc Interv .
2020;13:502 –513.
4.2. Analgesics
1.GISSI-3: effects of lisinopril and transdermal glyceryl
trinitrate singly and together on 6-week mortality andventricular function after acute myocardial infarction.Gruppo Italiano per lo Studio della Sopravvivenzanell’infarto Miocardico. Lancet . 1994;343:1115 –1122.
2.ISIS-4: a randomised factorial trial assessing early
oral captopril, oral mononitrate, and intravenousmagnesium sulphate in 58,050 patients with sus-pected acute myocardial infarction. ISIS-4 (Fourth In-ternational Study of Infarct Survival) CollaborativeGroup. Lancet . 1995;345:669 –685.
3.Shotan A, Brill Z, Matetzky S, et al. Pain scoring-a
method for assessing acute antianginal therapy com-
parison of the response to acute sublingual adminis-tration of an isosorbide dinitrate tablet, isosorbidedinitrate spray and nitroglycerin spray in unstableangina. Cardiology . 1998;89:163 –169.
4.Bosson N, Isakson B, Morgan JA, et al. Safety and
effectiveness of ﬁeld nitroglycerin in patients with
suspected ST elevation myocardial infarction. Prehosp
Emerg Care . 2019;23:603 –611.
5.Parodi G. Chest pain relief in patients with acute
myocardial infarction. Eur Heart J Acute Cardiovasc
Care. 2016;5:277 –281.
6.Meine TJ, Roe MT, Chen AY, et al. Association of
intravenous morphine use and outcomes in acutecoronary syndromes: results from the CRUSADE
Quality Improvement Initiative. Am Heart J . 2005;149:
1043 –1049 .
7.Kubica J, Adamski P, Ostrowska M, et al. Morphine
delays and attenuates ticagrelor exposure and actionin patients with myocardial infarction: the randomized,double-blind, placebo-controlled IMPRESSION trial.Eur Heart J . 2016;37:245 –252.
8.Ibrahim K, Shah R, Goli RR, et al. Fentanyl delays
the platelet inhibition effects of oral ticagrelor: fullreport of the PACIFY randomized clinical trial. Thromb
Haemost . 2018;118:1409 –1418
.
9.Hobl EL, Stimp ﬂT, Ebner J, et al. Morphine de-
creases clopidogrel concentrations and effects: a ran-domized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2014;63:630 –635.
10.Thomas MR, Morton AC, Hossain R, et al. Morphine
delays the onset of action of prasugrel in patients withJACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2211

prior history of ST-elevation myocardial infarction.
Thromb Haemost . 2016;116:96 –102.
11.Lapostolle F, van ’t Hof AW, Hamm CW, et al.
Morphine and ticagrelor interaction in primary percu-taneous coronary intervention in ST-segment eleva-tion myocardial infarction: ATLANTIC-Morphine. Am J
Cardiovasc Drugs . 2019;19:173 –183.
12.Furtado RHM, Nicolau JC, Guo J, et al. Morphine
and cardiovascular outcomes among patients withnon-ST-segment elevation acute coronary syndromesundergoing coronary angiography. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2020;75:289 –300.
13.Batchelor R, Liu DH, Bloom J, et al. Association of
periprocedural intravenous morphine use on clinicaloutcomes in ST-elevation myocardial infarction(STEMI) treated by primary percutaneous coronary
intervention: systematic review and meta-analysis.
Catheter Cardiovasc Interv . 2020;96:76 –88.
14.Lee SW, Kuo N, Hou SK, et al. Effects of morphine
and P2Y inhibitor amongst patients with acute coro-nary syndrome: a meta-analysis of comparativestudies. Am J Emerg Med . 2023;70:119 –126.
15.Schmidt M, Lamberts M, Olsen AM, et al. Cardio-
vascular safety of non-aspirin non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs: review and position paper by
the working group for Cardiovascular Pharmaco-
therapy of the European Society of Cardiology. Eur
Heart J . 2016;37:1015 –1023 .
16.Schjerning Olsen AM, Fosbol EL, Lindhardsen J,
et al. Duration of treatment with nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs and impact on risk of death and
recurrent myocardial infarction in patients with priormyocardial infarction: a nationwide cohort study. Cir-
culation . 2011;123:2226 –2235 .
17.Gislason GH, Jacobsen S, Rasmussen JN, et al. Risk
of death or reinfarction associated with the use of
selective cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors and nonselectivenonsteroidal antiin ﬂammatory drugs after acute
myocardial infarction. Circulation . 2006;113:2906 –
2913 .
18.Hippisley-Cox J, Coupland C. Risk of myocardial
infarction in patients taking cyclo-oxygenase-2 in-hibitors or conventional non-steroidal anti-in ﬂamma-
tory drugs: population based nested case-control
analysis. BMJ. 2005;330:1366 .
19.Antman EM, Bennett JS, Daugherty A, et al. Use
of nonsteroidal antiin ﬂammatory drugs: an update
for clinicians: a scienti ﬁc statement from the Amer-
ican Heart Association. Circulation . 2007;115:1634
–
1642 .
20.Doucet S, Malekianpour M, Theroux P, et al. Ran-
domized trial comparing intravenous nitroglycerin andheparin for treatment of unstable angina secondary torestenosis after coronary artery angioplasty. Circula-
tion. 2000;101:955 –961.
21.Karlberg KE, Saldeen T, Wallin R, et al. Intravenous
nitroglycerin reduces ischaemia in unstable anginapectoris: a double-blind placebo-controlled study.J Intern Med . 1998;243:25 –31.
22.Perez MI, Musini VM, Wright JM. Effect of early
treatment with anti-hypertensive drugs on short andlong-term mortality in patients with an acute cardio-vascular event. Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2009:
CD006743 .
23.Kloner RA, Hutter AM, Emmick JT, et al. Time
course of the interaction between tadala ﬁl and ni-
trates. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2003;42:1855 –1860 .24.Parker JD, Bart BA, Webb DJ, et al. Safety of
intravenous nitroglycerin after administration of sil-denaﬁl citrate to men with coronary artery disease: a
double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized, cross-
over trial. Crit Care Med . 2007;35:1863 –1868 .
25.Swearingen D, Nehra A, Morelos S, et al. Hemo-
dynamic effect of avana ﬁl and glyceryl trinitrate
coadministration. Drugs Context . 2013;2013:212248 .
4.3.1. Aspirin
1.Antithrombotic Trialists Collaboration. Collabora-
tive meta-analysis of randomised trials of antiplate-let therapy for prevention of death, myocardialinfarction, and stroke in high risk patients. BMJ.
2002;324:71 –86.
2.Baigent C, Blackwell L, Collins R, et al, Antith-
rombotic Trialists Collaboration. Aspirin in the primary
and secondary prevention of vascular disease: collab-orative meta-analysis of individual participant datafrom randomised trials. Lancet . 2009;373:1849 –1860 .
3.ISIS-2 (Second International Study of Infarct Sur-
vival) Collaborative Group. Randomised trial of intra-venous streptokinase, oral aspirin, both, or neitheramong 17,187 cases of suspected acute myocardial
infarction: ISIS-2. Lancet . 1988;2:349 –360.
4.Mehta SR, Bassand JP, Chrolavicius S, et al. Current
Oasis Investigators. Dose comparisons of clopidogreland aspirin in acute coronary syndromes. N Engl J Med .
2010;363:930 –942.
5.Jones WS, Mulder H, Wruck LM, et al. Comparative
effectiveness of aspirin dosing in cardiovascular dis-ease. N Engl J Med . 2021;384:1981 –
1990 .
6.Antiplatelet Trialists ’Collaboration. Collaborative
overview of randomised trials of antiplatelet therapy:prevention of death, myocardial infarction, and stroke
by prolonged antiplatelet therapy in various categories
of patients. BMJ. 1994;308:81 –106.
7.Gollapudi RR, Teirstein PS, Stevenson DD,
Simon RA. Aspirin sensitivity: implications for patientswith coronary artery disease. JAMA . 2004;292:3017 –
3023 .
8.Cortellini G, Raiteri A, Galli M, et al. Acetylsalicylic
acid challenge or desensitization in sensitive patientswith cardiovascular disease. J Thromb Thrombolysis .
2023;55:762 –769.
9.Chopra AM, Díez-Villanueva P, Córdoba-Soriano JG,
et al. Meta-analysis of acetylsalicylic acid desensitiza-
tion in patients with acute coronary syndrome. Am J
Cardiol . 2019;124:14 –19.
10.Patrono C, Garcia Rodriguez LA, Landol ﬁR, et al.
Low-dose aspirin for the prevention of athero-thrombosis. N Engl J Med . 2005;353:2373 –2383 .
11.Mahaffey KW, Wojdyla DM, Carroll K, et al. Tica-
grelor compared with clopidogrel by geographic re-gion in the Platelet Inhibition and Patient Outcomes(PLATO) trial. Circulation . 2011;124:544 –554.
4.3.2. Oral P2Y12 Inhibitors During Hospitalization
1.Yusuf S, Zhao F, Mehta SR, et al. Effects of clopi-
dogrel in addition to aspirin in patients with acute
coronary syndromes without ST-segment elevation.N Engl J Med . 2001;345:494 –502.
2.Sabatine MS, Cannon CP, Gibson CM, et al. Addition
of clopidogrel to aspirin and ﬁbrinolytic therapy for
myocardial infarction with ST-segment elevation.N Engl J Med . 2005;352:1179 –1189 .3.Chen ZM, Jiang LX, Chen YP, et al. Addition of clo-
pidogrel to aspirin in 45,852 patients with acutemyocardial infarction: randomised placebo-controlledtrial. Lancet . 2005;366:1607 –1621 .
4.Wiviott SD, Braunwald E, McCabe CH, et al.
Prasugrel versus clopidogrel in patients with acute
coronary syndromes. N Engl J Med . 2007;357:2001 –
2015 .
5.Wallentin L, Becker RC, Budaj A, et al. Ticagrelor
versus clopidogrel in patients with acute coronarysyndromes. N Engl J Med . 2009;361:1045 –
1057 .
6.Cannon CP, Harrington RA, James S, et al. Com-
parison of ticagrelor with clopidogrel in patients with aplanned invasive strategy for acute coronary syn-dromes (PLATO): a randomised double-blind study.Lancet . 2010;375:283 –293.
7.James SK, Roe MT, Cannon CP, et al. Ticagrelor
versus clopidogrel in patients with acute coronary
syndromes intended for non-invasive management:substudy from prospective randomised PLATelet inhi-bition and patient Outcomes (PLATO) trial. BMJ.
2011;342:d3527 .
8.Mehta SR, Yusuf S, Peters RJ, et al. Effects of pre-
treatment with clopidogrel and aspirin followed bylong-term therapy in patients undergoing percuta-
neous coronary intervention: the PCI-CURE study.
Lancet . 2001;358:527 –533.
9.Montalescot G, Wiviott SD, Braunwald E, et al.
Prasugrel compared with clopidogrel in patients un-dergoing percutaneous coronary intervention for ST-elevation myocardial infarction (TRITON-TIMI 38):double-blind, randomised controlled trial. Lancet .
2009;373:723 –731.
10.Steg PG, James S, Harrington RA, et al. Ticagrelor
versus clopidogrel in patients with ST-elevation acute
coronary syndromes intended for reperfusion with
primary percutaneous coronary intervention: a PlateletInhibition and Patient Outcomes (PLATO) trial sub-group analysis. Circulation . 2010;122:2131 –2141.
11.Sabatine MS, Cannon CP, Gibson CM, et al. Effect of
clopidogrel pretreatment before percutaneous coro-nary intervention in patients with ST-elevationmyocardial infarction treated with ﬁbrinolytics: the
PCI-CLARITY study. JAMA . 2005;294:1224 –1232 .
12.Lawton JS, Tamis-Holland JE, Bangalore S, et al.
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI guideline for coronary artery
revascularization: a report of the American College ofCardiology/American Heart Association Joint Commit-tee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2022;79:e21 –e129 .
13.Virani SS, Newby LK, Arnold SV, et al. 2023 AHA/
ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA guideline for the man-agement of patients with chronic coronary disease: a
report of the American Heart Association/American
College of Cardiology Joint Committee on ClinicalPractice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2023;82:833 –
955.
14.O’Donoghue M, Wiviott SD. Clopidogrel response
variability and future therapies: clopidogrel: does onesizeﬁt all? Circulation . 2006;114:e600 –e606 .
15.Gurbel PA, Bliden KP, Hiatt BL, O ’Connor CM.
Clopidogrel for coronary stenting: response variability,drug resistance, and the effect of pretreatment
platelet reactivity. Circulation . 2003;107:2908 –2913 .
16.Mega JL, Close SL, Wiviott SD, et al. Cytochrome
p-450 polymorphisms and response to clopidogrel.
N Engl J Med . 2009;360:354 –362.Rao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372212

17.Simon T, Verstuyft C, Mary-Krause M, et al. Genetic
determinants of response to clopidogrel and cardio-vascular events. N Engl J Med . 2009;360:363 –375.
18.Fox KA, Mehta SR, Peters R, et al. Bene ﬁts and
risks of the combination of clopidogrel and aspirin inpatients undergoing surgical revascularization for non-
ST-elevation acute coronary syndrome: the Clopidog-
rel in Unstable angina to prevent Recurrent ischemicEvents (CURE) Trial. Circulation . 2004;110:1202 –1208 .
19.Held C, Asenblad N, Bassand JP, et al. Ticagrelor
versus clopidogrel in patients with acute coronarysyndromes undergoing coronary artery bypass surgery:results from the PLATO (Platelet Inhibition and PatientOutcomes) trial. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2011;57:672 –684.
20.Smith PK, Goodnough LT, Levy JH, et al. Mortality
beneﬁt with prasugrel in the TRITON-TIMI 38 coronary
artery bypass grafting cohort: risk-adjusted retro-
spective data analysis. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2012;60:388 –
396.
21.Zhao Q, Zhu Y, Xu Z, et al. Effect of ticagrelor plus
aspirin, ticagrelor alone, or aspirin alone on saphenousvein graft patency 1 year after coronary artery bypassgrafting: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA . 2018;319:
1677 –1686 .
22.Schüpke S, Neumann FJ, Menichelli M, et al. Tica-
grelor or prasugrel in patients with acute coronary
syndromes. N Engl J Med . 2019;381:1524 –1534 .
23.Gimbel M, Qaderdan K, Willemsen L, et al. Clopi-
dogrel versus ticagrelor or prasugrel in patients aged70 years or older with non-ST-elevation acute coro-nary syndrome (POPular AGE): the randomised, open-label, non-inferiority trial. Lancet . 2020;395:1374 –
1381.
24.Montalescot G, Bolognese L, Dudek D, et al. Pre-
treatment with prasugrel in non-ST-segment elevation
acute coronary syndromes. N Engl J Med . 2013;369:
999 –1010 .
25.Montalescot G, Van ’t Hof AW, Lapostolle F, et al.
Prehospital ticagrelor in ST-segment elevationmyocardial infarction. N Engl J Med . 2014;371:1016 –
1027 .
26.Rohla M, Ye SX, Shibutani H, et al. Pretreatment
with P2Y(12) inhibitors in ST-segment elevationmyocardial infarction: insights from the Bern-PCI reg-istry. JACC Cardiovasc Interv . 2024;17:17 –28.
27.Bellemain-Appaix A, O ’Connor SA, Silvain J, et al.
Association of clopidogrel pretreatment with mortal-
ity, cardiovascular events, and major bleeding amongpatients undergoing percutaneous coronary interven-tion: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA
.
2012;308:2507 –2516 .
28.Berwanger O, Nicolau JC, Carvalho AC, et al. Tica-
grelor vs clopidogrel after ﬁbrinolytic therapy in patients
with ST-elevation myocardial infarction: a randomized
clinical trial. JAMA Cardiol . 2018;3:391 –399.
4.3.3. Intravenous P2Y12 Inhibition
1.Bhatt DL, Lincoff AM, Gibson CM, et al. Intravenous
platelet blockade with cangrelor during PCI. N Engl J
Med. 2009;361:2330 –2341 .
2.Bhatt DL, Stone GW, Mahaffey KW, et al. Effect of
platelet inhibition with cangrelor during PCI on
ischemic events. N Engl J Med . 2013;368:1303 –1313.
3.Harrington RA, Stone GW, McNulty S, et al. Platelet
inhibition with cangrelor in patients undergoing PCI.
N Engl J Med . 2009;361:2318 –2329 .4.Steg PG, Bhatt DL, Hamm CW, et al. Effect of can-
grelor on periprocedural outcomes in percutaneouscoronary interventions: a pooled analysis of patient-level data. Lancet . 2013;382:1981 –1992 .
5.Lawton JS, Tamis-Holland JE, Bangalore S, et al.
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI guideline for coronary artery
revascularization: a report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Commit-tee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2022;79:e21 –e129 .
6.Akers WS, Oh JJ, Oestreich JH, et al. Pharmacoki-
netics and pharmacodynamics of a bolus and infusionof cangrelor: a direct, parenteral P2Y12 receptorantagonist. J Clin Pharmacol . 2010;50:27 –35.
7.Angiolillo DJ, Firstenberg MS, Price MJ, et al.
Bridging antiplatelet therapy with cangrelor in pa-tients undergoing cardiac surgery: a randomized
controlled trial. JAMA . 2012;307:265 –274.
8.FDA. Cangrelor prescribing information for intra-
venous use. Accessed October 5, 2023. https://www.
accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2019/204958s002lbl.pdf
4.3.4. Intravenous Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa Inhibitors
1.Stone GW, Maehara A, Witzenbichler B, et al.
Intracoronary abciximab and aspiration thrombectomyin patients with large anterior myocardial infarction:the INFUSE-AMI randomized trial. JAMA . 2012;307:
1817 –1826 .
2.Thiele H, Wöhrle J, Hambrecht R, et al. Intra-
coronary versus intravenous bolus abciximab during
primary percutaneous coronary intervention in pa-tients with acute ST-elevation myocardial infarction: arandomised trial. Lancet . 2012;379:923
–931.
3.Stone GW, Grines CL, Cox DA, et al. Comparison of
angioplasty with stenting, with or without abciximab,in acute myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med .
2002;346:957 –966.
4.Giugliano RP, White JA, Bode C, et al. Early versus
delayed, provisional epti ﬁbatide in acute coronary
syndromes. N Engl J Med . 2009;360:2176 –2190 .
5.Kastrati A, Neumann FJ, Schulz S, et al. Abciximab
and heparin versus bivalirudin for non-ST-elevation
myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med . 2011;365:1980 –
1989 .
6.Lawton JS, Tamis-Holland JE, Bangalore S, et al.
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI guideline for coronary arteryrevascularization: a report of the American College ofCardiology/American Heart Association Joint Commit-tee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2022;79:e21 –e129 .
7.Zhao XQ, Theroux P, Snapinn SM, Sax FL. Intra-
coronary thrombus and platelet glycoprotein IIb/IIIa
receptor blockade with tiro ﬁban in unstable angina or
non-Q-wave myocardial infarction. Angiographic re-sults from the PRISM-PLUS trial (Platelet receptor in-hibition for ischemic syndrome management inpatients limited by unstable signs and symptoms).PRISM-PLUS Investigators. Circulation . 1999;100:
1609 –1615 .
8.Ohlmann P, Reydel P, Jacquemin L, et al. Pre-
hospital abciximab in ST-segment elevation myocar-
dial infarction: results of the randomized, double-blind
MISTRAL study. Circ Cardiovasc Interv . 2012;5:69 .
9.Bertrand OF, Larose É, Bagur R, et al. A randomized
double-blind placebo-controlled study comparingintracoronary versus intravenous abciximab in patients
with ST-elevation myocardial infarction undergoingtransradial rescue percutaneous coronary interventionafter failed thrombolysis. Am J Cardiol . 2018;122:47 –
53.
10.Sanati HR, Zahedmehr A, Firouzi A, et al. Intra-
coronary versus intravenous epti ﬁbatide during
percutaneous coronary intervention for acute ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction; a random-ized controlled trial. Cardiovasc Interv Ther . 2017;32:
351–357.
11.Kastrati A, Mehilli J, Neumann FJ, et al. Abciximab
in patients with acute coronary syndromes undergoingpercutaneous coronary intervention after clopidogrel
pretreatment: the ISAR-REACT 2 randomized trial.
JAMA . 2006;295:1531 –1538 .
4.4. Parenteral Anticoagulation
1.Risk of myocardial infarction and death during
treatment with low dose aspirin and intravenousheparin in men with unstable coronary artery disease.
The RISC Group. Lancet . 1990;336:827 –
830.
2.Cohen M, Adams PC, Parry G, et al. Combination
antithrombotic therapy in unstable rest angina and
non-Q-wave infarction in nonprior aspirin users.Primary end points analysis from the ATACS trial.Antithrombotic Therapy in Acute Coronary Syn-dromes Research Group. Circulation . 1994;89:81 –
88.
3.Oler A, Whooley MA, Oler J, Grady D. Adding hep-
arin to aspirin reduces the incidence of myocardial
infarction and death in patients with unstable angina.
A meta-analysis. JAMA . 1996;276:811 –815.
4.Theroux P, Ouimet H, McCans J, et al. Aspirin,
heparin, or both to treat acute unstable angina. N Engl
J Med . 1988;319:1105 –1111.
5.Yusuf S, Mehta SR, Chrolavicius S, et al. Fifth Or-
ganization to Assess Strategies in Acute IschemicSyndromes Investigators. Comparison of fondaparinuxand enoxaparin in acute coronary syndromes. N Engl J
Med. 2006;354:1464 –1476 .
6.Steg PG, Jolly SS, Mehta SR, et al. Futura Oasis Trial
Group. Low-dose vs standard-dose unfractionated
heparin for percutaneous coronary intervention inacute coronary syndromes treated with fondaparinux:the FUTURA/OASIS-8 randomized trial. JAMA .
2010;304:1339 –1349 .
7.Murphy SA, Gibson CM, Morrow DA, et al. Ef ﬁcacy
and safety of the low-molecular weight heparinenoxaparin compared with unfractionated heparin
across the acute coronary syndrome spectrum: a meta-
analysis. Eur Heart J . 2007;28:2077 –2086 .
8.Ferguson JJ, Califf RM, Antman EM, et al. Enox-
aparin vs unfractionated heparin in high-risk patientswith non-ST-segment elevation acute coronary syn-dromes managed with an intended early invasivestrategy: primary results of the SYNERGY randomizedtrial. JAMA . 2004;292:45 –54.
9.Antman EM, Louwerenburg HW, Baars HF, et al.
Enoxaparin as adjunctive antithrombin therapy for ST-
elevation myocardial infarction: results of the ENTIRE-
Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction (TIMI) 23 Trial.Circulation . 2002;105:1642 –1649 .
10.Antman EM, Morrow DA, McCabe CH, et al.
Enoxaparin versus unfractionated heparin with ﬁbri-
nolysis for ST-elevation myocardial infarction. N Engl J
Med. 2006;354:1477 –1488 .JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2213

11.Cohen M, Demers C, Gur ﬁnkel EP, et al.
A comparison of low-molecular-weight heparin withunfractionated heparin for unstable coronary arterydisease. Ef ﬁcacy and Safety of Subcutaneous Enox-
aparin in Non-Q-Wave Coronary Events Study Group.
N Engl J Med . 1997;337:447 –452.
12.Granger CB, Miller JM, Bovill EG, et al. Rebound
increase in thrombin generation and activity after
cessation of intravenous heparin in patients with acutecoronary syndromes. Circulation . 1995;91:1929 –1935 .
13.Bahit MC, Topol EJ, Califf RM, et al. Reactivation of
ischemic events in acute coronary syndromes: resultsfrom GUSTO-IIb. Gobal Use of Strategies To Openoccluded arteries in acute coronary syndromes. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2001;37:1001 –1007 .
14.Stone GW, Witzenbichler B, Guagliumi G, et al.
Bivalirudin during primary PCI in acute myocardialinfarction. N Engl J Med . 2008;358:2218 –2230 .
15.Li Y, Liang Z, Qin L, et al. Bivalirudin plus a high-
dose infusion versus heparin monotherapy in patients
with ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction un-
dergoing primary percutaneous coronary intervention:a randomised trial. Lancet . 2022;400:1847 –1857 .
16.Cavender MA, Sabatine MS. Bivalirudin versus
heparin in patients planned for percutaneous coronaryintervention: a meta-analysis of randomised controlledtrials. Lancet . 2014;384:599 –606.
17.Bangalore S, Toklu B, Kotwal A, et al. Anticoagu-
lant therapy during primary percutaneous coronaryintervention for acute myocardial infarction: a meta-analysis of randomized trials in the era of stents and
P2Y12 inhibitors. BMJ (Online) . 2014;349 .
18.Steg PG, van ’t Hof A, Hamm CW, et al. Bivalirudin
started during emergency transport for primary PCI.
N Engl J Med . 2013;369:2207 –2217 .
19.Han Y, Guo J, Zheng Y, et al. Bivalirudin vs heparin
with or without tiro ﬁban during primary percutaneous
coronary intervention in acute myocardial infarction:the BRIGHT randomized clinical trial. JAMA . 2015;313:
1336 –1346 .
20.Stone GW, White HD, Ohman EM, et al. Bivalirudin
in patients with acute coronary syndromes undergoingpercutaneous coronary intervention: a subgroup anal-ysis from the Acute Catheterization and Urgent Inter-vention Triage strategy (ACUITY) trial. Lancet .
2007;369:907 –919.
21.Kastrati A, Neumann FJ, Schulz S, et al. Abciximab
and heparin versus bivalirudin for non-ST-elevation
myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med . 2011;365:1980
–
1989 .
22.Kheiri B, Rao SV, Osman M, et al. Meta-analysis of
bivalirudin versus heparin in transradial coronary in-terventions. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv . 2020;96:
1240 –1248 .
23.Bikdeli B, Erlinge D, Valgimigli M, et al. Bivalirudin
versus heparin during PCI in NSTEMI: individual patientdata meta-analysis of large randomized trials. Circu-
lation . 2023;148:1207 –1219.
24.Montalescot G, Zeymer U, Silvain J, et al. Intra-
venous enoxaparin or unfractionated heparin in pri-mary percutaneous coronary intervention for ST-
elevation myocardial infarction: the international
randomised open-label ATOLL trial. Lancet . 2011;378:
693 –703.
25.Collet JP, Huber K, Cohen M, et al. A direct com-
parison of intravenous enoxaparin with unfractionatedheparin in primary percutaneous coronary intervention
(from the ATOLL trial). Am J Cardiol . 2013;112:1367 –
1372 .
26.Silvain J, Beygui F, Barthelemy O, et al. Ef ﬁcacy
and safety of enoxaparin versus unfractionated heparinduring percutaneous coronary intervention: systematicreview and meta-analysis. BMJ. 2012;344:e553 .
27.Yusuf S, Mehta SR, Chrolavicius S, et al. Effects of
fondaparinux on mortality and reinfarction in patients
with acute ST-segment elevation myocardial infarc-
tion: the OASIS-6 randomized trial. JAMA . 2006;295:
1519 –1530 .
28.Ross AM, Molhoek P, Lundergan C, et al. Ran-
domized comparison of enoxaparin, a low-molecular-weight heparin, with unfractionated heparin adjunc-tive to recombinant tissue plasminogen activatorthrombolysis and aspirin: second trial of Heparin andAspirin Reperfusion Therapy (HART II). Circulation .
2001;104:648 –652.
29.Efﬁcacy and safety of tenecteplase in combination
with enoxaparin, abciximab, or unfractionated heparin:
the ASSENT-3 randomised trial in acute myocardialinfarction. Lancet . 2001;358:605 –613.
30.Peters RJ, Joyner C, Bassand JP, et al. The role of
fondaparinux as an adjunct to thrombolytic therapy inacute myocardial infarction: a subgroup analysis of theOASIS-6 trial. Eur Heart J . 2008;29:324 –331.
31.Lawton JS, Tamis-Holland JE, Bangalore S, et al.
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI guideline for coronary arteryrevascularization: a report of the American College ofCardiology/American Heart Association Joint Commit-
tee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2022;79:e21 –e129 .
32.Thygesen K, Alpert JS, Jaffe AS, et al. Fourth uni-
versal de ﬁnition of myocardial infarction (2018). JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2018;72:2231 –2264 .
33.Zeymer U, Rao SV, Montalescot G. Anticoagulation
in coronary intervention. Eur Heart J . 2016;37:3376 –
3385 .
34.Mahaffey KW, Lewis BE, Wildermann NM, et al.
The anticoagulant therapy with bivalirudin to assist inthe performance of percutaneous coronary interven-tion in patients with heparin-induced thrombocyto-penia (ATBAT) study: main results. J Invasive Cardiol .
2003;15:611 –616.
35.Lewis BE, Matthai WH Jr, Cohen M, et al. Arga-
troban anticoagulation during percutaneous coronary
intervention in patients with heparin-induced throm-
bocytopenia. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv . 2002;57:177 –
184.
36.Eikelboom JW, Anand SS, Malmberg K, et al.
Unfractionated heparin and low-molecular-weightheparin in acute coronary syndrome without STelevation: a meta-analysis. Lancet . 2000;355:1936 –
1942 .
37.Ducrocq G, Jolly S, Mehta SR, et al. Activated
clotting time and outcomes during percutaneous cor-onary intervention for non-ST-segment-elevationmyocardial infarction: insights from the FUTURA/
OASIS-8 Trial. Circ Cardiovasc Interv . 2015;8:e002044 .
38.James S, Koul S, Andersson J, et al. Bivalirudin
versus heparin monotherapy in ST-segment-elevation
myocardial infarction. Circ Cardiovasc Interv . 2021;14:
e008969 .
39.Wang ZD, Chen YX, Liu M, et al. Safety of bivalir-
udin combined with ticagrelor in the emergency PCI inpatients with acute ST-segment elevation myocardial
infarction. Clin Appl Thromb Hemost . 2022;28:
10760296221077973 .
40.Navarese EP, Schulze V, Andreotti F, et al.
Comprehensive meta-analysis of safety and ef ﬁcacy of
bivalirudin versus heparin with or without routineglycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors in patients with acutecoronary syndrome. JACC Cardiovasc Interv . 2015;8:
201–213.
41.Stone GW, McLaurin BT, Cox DA, et al. Bivalirudin
for patients with acute coronary syndromes. N Engl J
Med. 2006;355:2203 –2216 .
42.Valgimigli M, Frigoli E, Leonardi S, et al. Bivalirudin
or unfractionated heparin in acute coronary syn-dromes. N Engl J Med . 2015;373:997 –1009 .
43.An international randomized trial comparing four
thrombolytic strategies for acute myocardial infarc-
tion.
N Engl J Med . 1993;329:673 –682.
44.Giraldez RR, Nicolau JC, Corbalan R, et al. Enox-
aparin is superior to unfractionated heparin in patientswith ST elevation myocardial infarction undergoingﬁbrinolysis regardless of the choice of lytic: an
ExTRACT-TIMI 25 analysis. Eur Heart J . 2007;28:1566 –
1573.
45.Eikelboom JW, Quinlan DJ, Mehta SR, et al.
Unfractionated and low-molecular-weight heparin asadjuncts to thrombolysis in aspirin-treated patients
with ST-elevation acute myocardial infarction: a meta-
analysis of the randomized trials. Circulation .
2005;112:3855 –3867 .
4.5. Lipid Management
1.Schwartz GG, Olsson AG, Ezekowitz MD, et al. Ef-
fects of atorvastatin on early recurrent ischemic eventsin acute coronary syndromes: the MIRACL study: arandomized controlled trial. JAMA . 2001;285:1711 –
1718.
2.de Lemos JA, Blazing MA, Wiviott SD, et al. Early
intensive vs a delayed conservative simvastatin strat-egy in patients with acute coronary syndromes: phaseZ of the A to Z trial. JAMA . 2004;292:1307 –1316.
3.Cannon CP, Braunwald E, McCabe CH, et al. Inten-
sive versus moderate lipid lowering with statins afteracute coronary syndromes. N Engl J Med . 2004;350:
1495 –1504 .
4.Baigent C, Blackwell L, Emberson J, et al. Ef ﬁcacy
and safety of more intensive lowering of LDL choles-
terol: a meta-analysis of data from 170 000 partici-pants in 26 randomised trials. Lancet . 2010;376:1670 –
1681 .
5.Cannon CP, Blazing MA, Giugliano RP, et al. Ezeti-
mibe added to statin therapy after acute coronary
syndromes. N Engl J Med . 2015;372:2387 –2397 .
6.Schwartz GG, Steg PG, Szarek M, et al. Alirocumab
and cardiovascular outcomes after acute coronary
syndrome. N Engl J Med . 2018;379:2097 –2107 .
7.Sabatine MS, Giugliano RP, Pedersen TR. Evolocu-
mab in patients with cardiovascular disease. N Engl J
Med. 2017;377:787 –788.
8.Moriarty PM, Thompson PD, Cannon CP, et al. Ef-
ﬁcacy and safety of alirocumab vs ezetimibe in statin-
intolerant patients, with a statin rechallenge arm: theODYSSEY ALTERNATIVE randomized trial. J Clin Lip-
idol. 2015;9:758 –769.
9.Nissen SE, Stroes E, Dent-Acosta RE, et al. Ef ﬁcacy
and tolerability of evolocumab vs ezetimibe in patientsRao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372214

with muscle-related statin intolerance: the GAUSS-3
randomized clinical trial. JAMA . 2016;315:1580 –1590 .
10.Nissen SE, Lincoff AM, Brennan D, et al.
Bempedoic acid and cardiovascular outcomes in statin-intolerant patients. N Engl J Med . 2023;388:1353 –
1364 .
11.Giugliano RP, Pedersen TR, Park JG, et al. Clinical
efﬁcacy and safety of achieving very low LDL-
cholesterol concentrations with the PCSK9 inhibitor
evolocumab: a prespeci ﬁed secondary analysis of the
FOURIER trial. Lancet . 2017;390:1962 –1971.
12.Schwartz GG, Gabriel Steg P, Bhatt DL, et al. Clin-
ical ef ﬁcacy and safety of alirocumab after acute cor-
onary syndrome according to achieved level of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol: a propensity score-matched analysis of the ODYSSEY OUTCOMES trial.
Circulation . 2021;143:1109 –1122.
13.Wiviott SD, Cannon CP, Morrow DA, et al. Can low-
density lipoprotein be too low? The safety and ef ﬁcacy
of achieving very low low-density lipoprotein withintensive statin therapy: a PROVE IT-TIMI 22 substudy.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2005;46:1411 –1416 .
14.Virani SS, Newby LK, Arnold SV, et al. 2023 AHA/
ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA guideline for the man-agement of patients with chronic coronary disease: areport of the American Heart Association/American
College of Cardiology Joint Committee on Clinical
Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2023;82:833 –
955.
15.Ulvenstam A, Graipe A, Irewall AL, et al. Incidence
and predictors of cardiovascular outcomes after acutecoronary syndrome in a population-based cohortstudy. Sci Rep . 2023;13:3447 .
16.Steen DL, Khan I, Andrade K, et al. Event rates and
risk factors for recurrent cardiovascular events andmortality in a contemporary post acute coronary syn-drome population representing 239,234 patients dur-ing 2005 to 2018 in the United States. J Am Heart
Assoc . 2022;11:e022198 .
17.Baigent C, Blackwell L, Emberson J, et al.
Cholesterol Treatment Trialists Collaboration. Ef ﬁcacy
and safety of more intensive lowering of LDLcholesterol: a meta-analysis of data from 170,000participants in 26 randomised trials. Lancet .
2010;376:1670 –1681 .
18.Barth JH, Jackson BM, Farrin AJ, et al. Change in
serum lipids after acute coronary syndromes: second-ary analysis of SPACE ROCKET study data and a
comparative literature review. Clin Chem . 2010;56:
1592 –1598 .
19.Murphy SA, Cannon CP, Wiviott SD, et al. Effect of
intensive lipid-lowering therapy on mortality afteracute coronary syndrome (a patient-level analysis ofthe Aggrastat to Zocor and Pravastatin or AtorvastatinEvaluation and Infection Therapy-Thrombolysis inMyocardial Infarction 22 trials). Am J Cardiol .
2007;100:1047 –1051 .
20.Gencer B, Mach F, Murphy SA, et al. Ef ﬁcacy of
evolocumab on cardiovascular outcomes in patients
with recent myocardial infarction: a prespeci ﬁed sec-
ondary analysis from the FOURIER trial. JAMA Cardiol .
2020;5:952 –957.
21.Chiang CE, Schwartz GG, Elbez Y, et al. Alirocumab
and cardiovascular outcomes in patients with previousmyocardial infarction: prespeci ﬁed subanalysis from
ODYSSEY OUTCOMES. Can J Cardiol . 2022;38:1542 –
1549 .22.Koskinas KC, Windecker S, Pedrazzini G, et al.
Evolocumab for early reduction of LDL cholesterollevels in patients with acute coronary syndromes(EVOPACS). J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;74:2452 –2462 .
23.Leucker TM, Blaha MJ, Jones SR, et al. Effect of
evolocumab on atherogenic lipoproteins during theperi- and early postinfarction period: a placebo-controlled, randomized trial. Circulation . 2020;142:
419–421.
24.Nicholls SJ, Kataoka Y, Nissen SE, et al. Effect of
evolocumab on coronary plaque phenotype and burdenin statin-treated patients following myocardial infarc-tion. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging . 2022;15:1308 –1321.
25.Raber L, Ueki Y, Otsuka T, et al. Effect of alir-
ocumab added to high-intensity statin therapy oncoronary atherosclerosis in patients with acutemyocardial infarction: the PACMAN-AMI randomizedclinical trial. JAMA . 2022;327:1771 –1781.
26.Ray KK, Wright RS, Kallend D, et al. Two phase 3
trials of inclisiran in patients with elevated LDLcholesterol. N Engl J Med . 2020;382:1507 –1519.
27.Bytyci I, Penson PE, Mikhailidis DP, et al. Preva-
lence of statin intolerance: a meta-analysis. Eur Heart
J. 2022;43:3213 –3223 .
28.Cheeley MK, Saseen JJ, Agarwala A, et al. NLA
scienti ﬁc statement on statin intolerance: a new de ﬁ-
nition and key considerations for ASCVD risk reduction
in the statin intolerant patient. J Clin Lipidol . 2022;16:
361–375.
29.Ray KK, Bays HE, Catapano AL, et al. Safety and
efﬁcacy of bempedoic acid to reduce LDL cholesterol.
N Engl J Med
. 2019;380:1022 –1032 .
30.Goldberg AC, Leiter LA, Stroes ESG, et al. Effect of
bempedoic acid vs placebo added to maximally toler-ated statins on low-density lipoprotein cholesterol inpatients at high risk for cardiovascular disease: theCLEAR Wisdom randomized clinical trial. JAMA .
2019;322:1780 –1788 .
31.Ballantyne CM, Laufs U, Ray KK, et al. Bempedoic
acid plus ezetimibe ﬁxed-dose combination in patients
with hypercholesterolemia and high CVD risk treatedwith maximally tolerated statin therapy. Eur J Prev
Cardiol . 2020;27:593 –603.
32.Oyama K, Giugliano RP, Blazing MA, et al. Baseline
low-density lipoprotein cholesterol and clinical out-comes of combining ezetimibe with statin therapy inIMPROVE-IT. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2021;78:1499 –1507 .
33.O’Donoghue ML, Giugliano RP, Wiviott SD, et al.
Long-term evolocumab in patients with establishedatherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. Circulation .
2022;146:1109 –1119.
34.Giugliano RP, Cannon CP, Blazing MA, et al. Bene ﬁt
of adding ezetimibe to statin therapy on cardiovascularoutcomes and safety in patients with versus withoutdiabetes mellitus: results from IMPROVE-IT (ImprovedReduction of Outcomes: Vytorin Ef ﬁcacy International
Trial). Circulation . 2018;137:1571 –1582 .
35.Bohula EA, Morrow DA, Giugliano RP, et al. Athe-
rothrombotic risk strati ﬁcation and ezetimibe for sec-
ondary prevention. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2017;69:911 –921.
36.Oliver W, Giugliano RP. Bene ﬁt of combination
ezetimibe/simvastatin among high-risk populations:lessons from the IMPROVE-IT trial. Curr Atheroscler
Rep. 2023;25:85 –93.
37.Sabatine MS, De Ferrari GM, Giugliano RP, et al.
Clinical bene ﬁt of evolocumab by severity and extentof coronary artery disease: analysis from FOURIER.
Circulation . 2018;138:756 –766.
38.Bonaca MP, Nault P, Giugliano RP, et al. Low-
density lipoprotein cholesterol lowering with evolo-cumab and outcomes in patients with peripheral arterydisease: insights from the FOURIER trial (Further Car-diovascular Outcomes Research With PCSK9 Inhibition
in Subjects With Elevated Risk). Circulation . 2018;137:
338–350.
39.
Jukema JW, Szarek M, Zijlstra LE, et al. Alirocumab
in patients with polyvascular disease and recent acutecoronary syndrome: ODYSSEY OUTCOMES trial. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2019;74:1167 –1176.
40.Roe MT, Li QH, Bhatt DL, et al. Risk categorization
using New American College of Cardiology/AmericanHeart Association Guidelines for cholesterol manage-ment and its relation to alirocumab treatmentfollowing acute coronary syndromes. Circulation .
2019;140:1578 –1589 .
41.Marston NA, Oyama K, Jarolim P, et al. Combining
high-sensitivity troponin with the American Heart As-
sociation/American College of Cardiology cholesterolguidelines to guide evolocumab therapy. Circulation .
2021;144:249 –251.
42.Grundy SM, Stone NJ, Bailey AL, et al. 2018 AHA/
ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/ADA/AGS/APhA/ASPC/NLA/PCNA guideline on the management of bloodcholesterol: a report of the American College of Car-
diology/American Heart Association Task Force on
Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;73:
e285 –e350 .
4.6. Beta-Blocker Therapy
1.Chen ZM, Pan HC, Chen YP, et al. Early intravenous
then oral metoprolol in 45,852 patients with acutemyocardial infarction: randomised placebo-controlledtrial. Lancet . 2005;366:1622 –1632 .
2.Roberts R, Rogers WJ, Mueller HS, et al. Immediate
versus deferred beta-blockade following thrombolytic
therapy in patients with acute myocardial infarction.
Results of the Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction(TIMI) II-B Study. Circulation . 1991;83:422 –437.
3.Freemantle N, Cleland J, Young P, et al. Beta
blockade after myocardial infarction: systematic reviewand meta regression analysis. BMJ. 1999;318:1730 –
1737.
4.de Peuter OR, Lussana F, Peters RJ, et al.
A systematic review of selective and non-selectivebeta blockers for prevention of vascular events in pa-tients with acute coronary syndrome or heart failure.
Neth J Med . 2009;67:284 –294.
5.Dahl Aarvik M, Sandven I, Dondo TB, et al. Effect of
oral beta-blocker treatment on mortality in contem-
porary post-myocardial infarction patients: a system-atic review and meta-analysis. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc
Pharmacother . 2019;5:12 –20.
6.Kontos MC, Diercks DB, Ho PM, et al. Treatment and
outcomes in patients with myocardial infarctiontreated with acute beta-blocker therapy: results fromthe American College of Cardiology ’s NCDR. Am Heart
J. 2011;161:864 –870.
7.Yndigegn T, Lindahl B, Mars K, et al. Beta-blockers
after myocardial infarction and preserved ejection
fraction. N Engl J Med . 2024;390:1372 –
1381.
8.Watanabe H, Ozasa N, Morimoto T, et al. Long-term
use of carvedilol in patients with ST-segment elevationJACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2215

myocardial infarction treated with primary percuta-
neous coronary intervention. PLoS One . 2018;13:
e0199347 .
9.Roolvink V, Ibanez B, Ottervanger JP, et al. Early
intravenous beta-blockers in patients with ST-segment
elevation myocardial infarction before primary percu-
taneous coronary intervention. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2016;67:2705 –2715 .
10.Ibanez B, Macaya C, Sánchez-Brunete V, et al. Ef-
fect of early metoprolol on infarct size in ST-segment-elevation myocardial infarction patients undergoingprimary percutaneous coronary intervention: the ef-
fect of metoprolol in cardioprotection during an acute
myocardial infarction (METOCARD-CNIC) trial. Circu-
lation . 2013;128:1495 –1503 .
4.7. Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone System
Inhibitors
1.Pfeffer MA, Braunwald E, Moyé LA, et al. Effect of
captopril on mortality and morbidity in patients withleft ventricular dysfunction after myocardial infarction.N Engl J Med . 1992;327:669 –677.
2.Ambrosioni E, Borghi C, Magnani B. The effect of the
angiotensin-converting –enzyme inhibitor zofenopril
on mortality and morbidity after anterior myocardialinfarction. N Engl J Med . 1995;332:80 –85.
3.Køber L, Torp-Pedersen C, Carlsen JE, et al.
A clinical trial of the angiotensin-converting –enzyme
inhibitor trandolapril in patients with left ventriculardysfunction after myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med .
1995;333:1670 –1676 .
4.ACE Inhibitor Myocardial Infarction Collaborative
Group. Indications for ACE inhibitors in the earlytreatment of acute myocardial infarction: systematicoverview of individual data from 100,000 patients inrandomized trials. Circulation . 1998;97:2202 –2212 .
5.Pfeffer MA, McMurray JJV, Velazquez EJ, et al.
Valsartan, captopril, or both in myocardial infarction
complicated by heart failure, left ventricular dysfunc-
tion, or both. N Engl J Med . 2003;349:1893 –1906 .
6.The Acute Infarction Ramipril Ef ﬁcacy Study In-
vestigators. Effect of ramipril on mortality and morbidityof survivors of acute myocardial infarction with clinicalevidence of heart failure. Lancet . 1993;342:821 –828.
7.Pitt B, Remme W, Zannad F, et al. Eplerenone, a
selective aldosterone blocker, in patients with left
ventricular dysfunction after myocardial infarction.
N Engl J Med . 2003;348:1309 –1321.
8.Yusuf S, Teo KK, Pogue J, et al. Telmisartan, ram-
ipril, or both in patients at high risk for vascular events.N Engl J Med . 2008;358:1547
–1559 .
9.McMurray JJV, Packer M, Desai AS, et al. Angio-
tensin –neprilysin inhibition versus enalapril in heart
failure. N Engl J Med . 2014;371:993 –1004 .
10.Pfeffer MA, Claggett B, Lewis EF, et al. Angio-
tensin receptor-neprilysin inhibition in acute myocar-
dial infarction. N Engl J Med . 2021;385:1845 –1855 .
11.Montalescot G, Pitt B, Lopez de Sa E, et al. Early
eplerenone treatment in patients with acute ST-elevation myocardial infarction without heart failure:the randomized double-blind REMINDER study. Eur
Heart J . 2014;35:2295 –2302 .
5.1. Regional Systems of STEMI Care
1.Alexander T, Mullasari AS, Joseph G, et al. A system
of care for patients with ST-segment elevationmyocardial infarction in India: the Tamil Nadu-ST-
Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction Program.JAMA Cardiol . 2017;2:498 –505.
2.Dharma S, Andriantoro H, Dakota I, et al. Hos-
pital outcomes in STEMI patients after the intro-duction of a regional STEMI network in the
metropolitan area of a developing country. AsiaIn-
tervention . 2018;4:92 –97.
3.Filgueiras Filho NM, Feitosa Filho GS, Solla DJF,
et al. Implementation of a regional network for ST-segment-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) careand 30-day mortality in a low- to middle-income cityin Brazil: ﬁndings from Salvador ’s STEMI registry
(RESISST). J Am Heart Assoc . 2018;7:e008624 .
4.Jollis JG, Al-Khalidi HR, Roettig ML, et al. Regional
systems of care demonstration project: American Heart
Association Mission: Lifeline STEMI Systems Acceler-
ator. Circulation . 2016;134:365 –374.
5.Jollis JG, Al-Khalidi HR, Roettig ML, et al. Impact of
regionalization of ST-segment-elevation myocardialinfarction care on treatment times and outcomes foremergency medical services-transported patientspresenting to hospitals with percutaneous coronaryintervention: Mission: Lifeline Accelerator-2. Circula-
tion. 2018;137:376 –387.
6.Puymirat E, Simon T, Cayla G, et al. Acute myocar-
dial infarction: changes in patient characteristics,management, and 6-month outcomes over a period of20 years in the FAST-MI program (French Registry ofAcute ST-Elevation or Non-ST-Elevation MyocardialInfarction) 1995 to 2015. Circulation . 2017;136:1908 –
1919 .
7.Jacobs AK, Ali MJ, Best PJ, et al. Systems of care for
ST-segment –elevation myocardial infarction: a policy
statement from the American Heart Association. Cir-
culation . 2021;144:e310 –e327
.
8.Jollis JG, Granger CB, Zègre-Hemsey JK, et al.
Treatment time and in-hospital mortality among pa-tients with ST-segment elevation myocardial infarc-tion, 2018-2021. JAMA . 2022;328:2033 –2040 .
5.2.1. PPCI in STEMI
1.McNamara RL, Wang Y, Herrin J, et al. Effect of
door-to-balloon time on mortality in patients with ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2006;47:2180 –2186 .
2.De Luca G, Suryapranata H, Ottervanger JP,
Antman EM. Time delay to treatment and mortality inprimary angioplasty for acute myocardial infarction:every minute of delay counts. Circulation . 2004;109:
1223 –1225 .
3.Berger PB, Ellis SG, Holmes DR Jr, et al. Relationship
between delay in performing direct coronary angio-
plasty and early clinical outcome in patients with acutemyocardial infarction: results from the global use ofstrategies to open occluded arteries in Acute CoronarySyndromes (GUSTO-IIb) trial. Circulation . 1999;100:
14–20.
4.Menees DS, Peterson ED, Wang Y, et al. Door-to-
balloon time and mortality among patients undergoing
primary PCI. N Engl J Med . 2013;369:901 –909.
5.Global Use of Strategies to Open Occluded Coronary
Arteries in Acute Coronary Syndromes AngioplastySubstudy I. A clinical trial comparing primary coronaryangioplasty with tissue plasminogen activator foracute myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med . 1997;336:
1621 –1628 .6.Keeley EC, Boura JA, Grines CL. Primary angioplasty
versus intravenous thrombolytic therapy for acutemyocardial infarction: a quantitative review of 23randomised trials. Lancet . 2003;361:13 –20.
7.Zijlstra F, Hoorntje JC, de Boer MJ, et al. Long-term
beneﬁt of primary angioplasty as compared with
thrombolytic therapy for acute myocardial infarction.
N Engl J Med . 1999;341:1413 –1419 .
8.Scholz KH, Maier SKG, Maier LS, et al. Impact of
treatment delay on mortality in ST-segment elevationmyocardial infarction (STEMI) patients presenting withand without haemodynamic instability: results fromthe German prospective, multicentre FITT-STEMI trial.Eur Heart J . 2018;39:1065 –1074 .
9.Hochman JS, Sleeper LA, Webb JG, et al. Early
revascularization in acute myocardial infarctioncomplicated by cardiogenic shock. SHOCK In-
vestigators. Should we emergently revascularize
occluded coronaries for cardiogenic shock. N Engl J
Med. 1999;341:625 –634.
10.Axelsson TA, Mennander A, Malmberg M, et al. Is
emergency and salvage coronary artery bypass graft-ing justi ﬁed? The Nordic emergency/salvage coronary
artery bypass grafting study. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg .
2016;49:1451 –1456 .
11.Liakopoulos OJ, Schlachtenberger G, Wendt D,
et al. Early clinical outcomes of surgical myocardial
revascularization for acute coronary syndromes
complicated by cardiogenic shock: a report from theNorth-Rhine-Westphalia Surgical Myocardial InfarctionRegistry. J Am Heart Assoc . 2019;8:e012049 .
12.Schömig A, Mehilli J, Antoniucci D, et al. Mechan-
ical reperfusion in patients with acute myocardialinfarction presenting more than 12 hours from symp-tom onset: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA .
2005;293:2865 –2872 .
13.Gierlotka M, Gasior M, Wilczek K, et al. Reperfusion
by primary percutaneous coronary intervention in pa-
tients with ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction
within 12 to 24 hours of the onset of symptoms (from aprospective national observational study [PL-ACS]).Am J Cardiol . 2011;107:501 –508.
14.Ndrepepa G, Kastrati A, Mehilli J, et al. Mechanical
reperfusion and long-term mortality in patients withacute myocardial infarction presenting 12 to 48 hoursfrom onset of symptoms. JAMA . 2009;301:487 –488.
15.Bouisset F, Gerbaud E, Bataille V, et al. Percuta-
neous myocardial revascularization in late-presentingpatients with STEMI. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2021;78:1291 –
1305 .
16.Hochman JS, Lamas GA, Buller CE, et al. Coronary
intervention for persistent occlusion after myocardial
infarction. N Engl J Med . 2006;355:2395 –2407 .
17.Steg PG, Thuaire C, Himbert D, et al. DECOPI
(DEsobstruction COronaire en Post-Infarctus): a ran-domized multi-centre trial of occluded artery angio-plasty after acute myocardial infarction. Eur Heart J .
2004;25:2187 –2194 .
18.Lawton JS, Tamis-Holland JE, Bangalore S, et al.
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI guideline for coronary arteryrevascularization: a report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Commit-
tee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2022;79:e21 –e129 .
19.Shen YC, Krumholz H, Hsia RY. Association of
cardiac care regionalization with access, treatment,Rao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372216

and mortality among patients with ST-segment
elevation myocardial infarction. Circ Cardiovasc Qual
Outcomes . 2021;14:e007195 .
20.Jollis JG, Al-Khalidi HR, Roettig ML, et al. Impact
of regionalization of ST-segment-elevation myocardialinfarction care on treatment times and outcomes for
emergency medical services-transported patients
presenting to hospitals with percutaneous coronaryintervention: Mission: Lifeline Accelerator-2. Circula-
tion. 2018;137:376 –387.
21.Jollis JG, Al-Khalidi HR, Roettig ML, al e.
Impact of regionalization of ST-segment –elevation
myocardial infarction care on treatment times andoutcomes for emergency medical services: trans-
ported patients presenting to hospitals with
percutaneous coronary intervention. Circulation .
2018;137:376 –387.
22.Krumholz H, Herrin J, Miller LW, et al. Improve-
ments in door-to-balloon time in the United States,2005 to 2010. Circulation . 2011;124:1038 –1045 .
23.Yeh RW, Sidney S, Chandra M, et al. Population
trends in the incidence and outcomes of acutemyocardial infarction. N Engl J Med . 2010;362:2155 –
2165 .
24.Jhand A, Atti V, Gwon Y, et al. Meta-analysis
of transradial vs transfemoral access for percuta-
neous coronary intervention in patients with STelevation myocardial infarction. Am J Cardiol .
2021;141:23 –30.
25.Völz S, Angerås O, Koul S, et al. Radial versus
femoral access in patients with acute coronary syn-drome undergoing invasive management: a pre-speciﬁed subgroup analysis from VALIDATE-
SWEDEHEART. Eur Heart J Acute Cardiovasc Care .
2019;8:510 –519.
26.Hochman JS, Sleeper LA, White HD, et al. One-year
survival following early revascularization for cardio-genic shock. JAMA . 2001;285:190 –192.
27.Hochman JS, Sleeper LA, Webb JG, et al. Early
revascularization and long-term survival in cardiogenicshock complicating acute myocardial infarction. JAMA .
2006;295:2511 –2515 .
28.Smilowitz NR, Alviar CL, Katz SD, Hochman JS.
Coronary artery bypass grafting versus percutaneouscoronary intervention for myocardial infarction
complicated by cardiogenic shock. Am Heart J .
2020;226:255 –263.
29.Hochman JS, Reynolds HR, D /C20zavík V, et al. Long-
term effects of percutaneous coronary intervention of
the totally occluded infarct-related artery in the sub-acute phase after myocardial infarction. Circulation .
2011;124:2320 –2328 .
5.2.2. Urgent CABG Surgery
1.Pi Y, Roe MT, Holmes DN, et al. Utilization, charac-
teristics, and in-hospital outcomes of coronary arterybypass grafting in patients with ST-segment-elevationmyocardial infarction: results from the National Car-
diovascular Data Registry Acute Coronary Treatment
and Intervention Outcomes Network Registry-Get WithThe Guidelines. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes .
2017;10:e003490 .
2.Grothusen C, Friedrich C, Loehr J, et al. Outcome of
stable patients with acute myocardial infarction andcoronary artery bypass surgery within 48 hours: asingle-center, retrospective experience. J Am Heart
Assoc . 2017;6:e005498 .3.Lawton JS, Tamis-Holland JE, Bangalore S, et al.
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI guideline for coronary arteryrevascularization: a report of the American College ofCardiology/American Heart Association Joint Commit-
tee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2022;79:e21 –e129 .
4.Patlolla SH, Kanwar A, Cheungpasitporn W, et al.
Temporal trends, clinical characteristics, and outcomesof emergent coronary artery bypass grafting for acutemyocardial infarction in the United States. J Am Heart
Assoc . 2021;10:e020517 .
5.Thielmann M, Wendt D, Slottosch I, et al. Coronary
artery bypass graft surgery in patients with acutecoronary syndromes after primary percutaneous cor-onary intervention: a current report from the North-
Rhine Westphalia Surgical Myocardial Infarction Reg-
istry. J Am Heart Assoc . 2021;10:e021182 .
5.3. Reperfusion at Non –PCI-Capable Hospitals
1.Nielsen PH, Terkelsen CJ, Nielsen TT, et al. System
delay and timing of intervention in acute myocardialinfarction (from the Danish Acute MyocardialInfarction-2 [DANAMI-2] trial). Am J Cardiol . 2011;108:
776–781.
2.Dalby M, Bouzamondo A, Lechat P, Montalescot G.
Transfer for primary angioplasty versus immediate
thrombolysis in acute myocardial infarction: a meta-
analysis. Circulation . 2003;108:1809 –1814 .
3.French WJ, Gunderson M, Travis D, et al. Emergency
interhospital transfer of patients with ST-segment-elevation myocardial infarction: call 9-1-1-the Amer-ican Heart Association Mission: Lifeline Program. JA m
Heart Assoc . 2022;11:e026700 .
4.Li K, Zhang B, Zheng B, et al. Reperfusion strategy
of ST-elevation myocardial infarction: a meta-analysisof primary percutaneous coronary intervention and
pharmaco-invasive therapy. Front Cardiovasc Med .
2022;9:813325 .
5.Fazel R, Joseph TI, Sankardas MA, et al. Comparison
of reperfusion strategies for ST-segment-elevationmyocardial infarction: a multivariate network meta-analysis. J Am Heart Assoc . 2020;9:e015186 .
6.Siontis KC, Barsness GW, Lennon RJ, et al. Phar-
macoinvasive and primary percutaneous coronaryintervention strategies in ST-elevation myocardialinfarction (from the Mayo Clinic STEMI Network). Am J
Cardiol . 2016;117:1904 –1910 .
7.Randomised trial of intravenous streptokinase, oral
aspirin, both, or neither among 17,187 cases of sus-
pected acute myocardial infarction: ISIS-2. ISIS-2
(Second International Study of Infarct Survival)Collaborative Group. Lancet . 1988;2:349 –360.
8.Effectiveness of intravenous thrombolytic treat-
ment in acute myocardial infarction. Gruppo Italianoper lo Studio della Streptochinasi nell ’Infarto Mio-
cardico (GISSI). Lancet . 1986;1:397 –402.
9.An international randomized trial comparing four
thrombolytic strategies for acute myocardial infarc-tion. N Engl J Med . 1993;329:673 –682.
10.Armstrong PW, Gershlick AH, Goldstein P, et al.
Fibrinolysis or primary PCI in ST-segment elevationmyocardial infarction. N Engl J Med . 2013;368:1379 –
1387 .
11.Schömig A, Mehilli J, Antoniucci D, et al. Mechan-
ical reperfusion in patients with acute myocardial
infarction presenting more than 12 hours fromsymptom onset: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA .
2005;293:2865 –2872 .
12.Gierlotka M, Gasior M, Wilczek K, et al. Reperfusion
by primary percutaneous coronary intervention in pa-tients with ST-segment elevation myocardial infarctionwithin 12 to 24 hours of the onset of symptoms (from a
prospective national observational study [PL-ACS]).
Am J Cardiol . 2011;107:501 –508.
13.Indications for ﬁbrinolytic therapy in suspected
acute myocardial infarction: collaborative overview ofearly mortality and major morbidity results from allrandomised trials of more than 1000 patients. Fibri-nolytic Therapy Trialists ’(FTT) Collaborative Group.
Lancet . 1994;343:311 –322.
14.Huber K, Goldstein P, Danchin N, et al. Enhancing
the ef ﬁcacy of delivering reperfusion therapy: a Eu-
ropean and North American experience with ST-
segment elevation myocardial infarction networks.Am Heart J . 2013;165:123 –132.
15.Hsia RY, Shen YC. Percutaneous coronary inter-
vention in the United States: risk factors for untimelyaccess. Health Serv Res . 2016;51:592 –609.
16.Nallamothu BK, Bates ER, Wang Y, et al. Driving
times and distances to hospitals with percutaneouscoronary intervention in the United States: implica-
tions for prehospital triage of patients with ST-
elevation myocardial infarction. Circulation . 2006;113:
1189 –1195.
17.Horwitz JR, Nichols A, Nallamothu BK, et al.
Expansion of invasive cardiac services in the United
States. Circulation . 2013;128:803 –810.
18.Andersen HR, Nielsen TT, Rasmussen K, et al.
A comparison of coronary angioplasty with ﬁbrinolytic
therapy in acute myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med .
2003;349:733 –742.
19.Pinto DS, Frederick PD, Chakrabarti AK, et al.
Beneﬁt of transferring ST-segment-elevation myocar-
dial infarction patients for percutaneous coronary
intervention compared with administration of onsiteﬁbrinolytic declines as delays increase. Circulation .
2011;124:2512 –2521 .
20.Yamaguchi J, Matoba T, Kikuchi M, et al. Effects of
door-in to door-out time on mortality among ST-
segment elevation myocardial infarction patients
transferred for primary percutaneous coronary inter-vention - systematic review and meta-analysis. Circ
Rep. 2022;4:109 –115.
21.Ward MJ, Vogus TJ, Bonnet K, et al. Breaking down
walls: a qualitative evaluation of perceived emergencydepartment delays for patients transferred with ST-elevation myocardial infarction. BMC Emerg Med .
2020;20:60 .
22.Sinnaeve PR, Armstrong PW, Gershlick AH, et al. ST-
segment-elevation myocardial infarction patients ran-domized to a pharmaco-invasive strategy or primarypercutaneous coronary intervention: Strategic Reperfu-
sion Early After Myocardial Infarction (STREAM) 1-year
mortality follow-up. Circulation . 2014;130:1139 –1145.
5.3.1. Timing and Choice of Agent for Fibrinolytic
Therapy
1.Halvorsen S, Huber K. Fibrinolytic treatment of ST-
elevation myocardial infarction. Update 2014.Hamostaseologie . 2014;34:47 –53.
2.Koutsoukis A, Kanakakis I. Challenges and unan-
swered questions in STEMI management. Hellenic J
Cardiol . 2019;60:211 –215.JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2217

3.Gershlick AH, Westerhout CM, Armstrong PW,
et al. Impact of a pharmacoinvasive strategy whendelays to primary PCI are prolonged. Heart . 2015;101:
692 –698.
4.Siddiqi TJ, Usman MS, Khan MS, et al. Meta-analysis
comparing primary percutaneous coronary interven-
tion versus pharmacoinvasive therapy in transfer pa-
tients with ST-elevation myocardial infarction. Am J
Cardiol . 2018;122:542 –547.
5.Fazel R, Joseph TI, Sankardas MA, et al. Comparison
of reperfusion strategies for ST-segment-elevationmyocardial infarction: a multivariate network meta-analysis. J Am Heart Assoc . 2020;9:e015186 .
6.Bainey KR, Armstrong PW, Zheng Y, et al. Pharma-
coinvasive strategy versus primary percutaneous cor-onary intervention in ST-elevation myocardial
infarction in clinical practice: insights from the Vital
Heart Response Registry. Circ Cardiovasc Interv .
2019;12:e008059 .
7.Sinnaeve PR, Armstrong PW, Gershlick AH, et al. ST-
segment-elevation myocardial infarction patients ran-domized to a pharmaco-invasive strategy or primarypercutaneous coronary intervention: Strategic Reper-fusion Early After Myocardial Infarction (STREAM) 1-
year mortality follow-up. Circulation . 2014;130:1139 –
1145.
8.Indications for ﬁbrinolytic therapy in suspected
acute myocardial infarction: collaborative overview ofearly mortality and major morbidity results from allrandomised trials of more than 1000 patients. Fibri-nolytic Therapy Trialists ’(FTT) Collaborative Group.
Lancet . 1994;343:311 –322.
9.Late Assessment of Thrombolytic Ef ﬁcacy (LATE)
study with alteplase 6-24 hours after onset of acute
myocardial infarction. Lancet . 1993;342:759 –766.
10.Langer A, Goodman SG, Topol EJ, et al. Late
assessment of thrombolytic ef ﬁcacy (LATE) study:
prognosis in patients with non-Q wave myocardialinfarction. (LATE Study Investigators). J Am Coll Car-
diol. 1996;27:1327 –1332 .
11.Bode C, Smalling RW, Berg G, et al. Randomized
comparison of coronary thrombolysis achieved withdouble-bolus reteplase (recombinant plasminogen
activator) and front-loaded, accelerated alteplase
(recombinant tissue plasminogen activator) in patientswith acute myocardial infarction. The RAPID II In-vestigators. Circulation . 1996;94:891 –898.
12.Armstrong PW, Collen D. Fibrinolysis for acute
myocardial infarction: current status and new horizonsfor pharmacological reperfusion, part 1. Circulation .
2001;103:2862 –2866 .
13.Neuhaus KL, von Essen R, Tebbe U, et al. Improved
thrombolysis in acute myocardial infarction with front-
loaded administration of alteplase: results of the rt-PA-APSAC patency study (TAPS). J Am Coll Cardiol .
1992;19:885 –891.
14.Cannon CP, McCabe CH, Gibson CM, et al. TNK-
tissue plasminogen activator in acute myocardialinfarction. Results of the Thrombolysis in MyocardialInfarction (TIMI) 10A dose-ranging trial. Circulation .
1997;95:351 –356.
15.Jinatongthai P, Kongwatcharapong J, Foo CY, et al.
Comparative ef ﬁcacy and safety of reperfusion therapy
with ﬁbrinolytic agents in patients with ST-segment
elevation myocardial infarction: a systematic review
and network meta-analysis. Lancet . 2017;390:747 –
759.16.Günlü S, Demir M. Comparison of tenecteplase
versus alteplase in STEMI patients treated with tica-grelor: a cross-sectional study. Am J Emerg Med .
2022;58:52 –56.
17.Van De Werf F, Adgey J, Ardissino D, et al.
Assessment of the Safety Ef ﬁcacy of a New Throm-
bolytic Investigators. Single-bolus tenecteplasecompared with front-loaded alteplase in acutemyocardial infarction: the ASSENT-2 double-blindrandomised trial. Lancet . 1999;354:716 –722.
18.Global Use of Strategies to Open Occluded Coro-
nary Arteries I. A comparison of reteplase with alte-plase for acute myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med .
1997;337:1118 –1123.
5.3.2. Coronary Angiography and PCI After
Fibrinolytic Therapy
1.Scheller B, Hennen B, Hammer B, et al. Bene ﬁcial
effects of immediate stenting after thrombolysis inacute myocardial infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2003;42:634 –641.
2.Le May MR, Wells GA, Labinaz M, et al. Combined
angioplasty and pharmacological intervention versusthrombolysis alone in acute myocardial infarction(CAPITAL AMI study). J Am Coll Cardiol . 2005;46:417 –
424.
3.Di Mario C, Dudek D, Piscione F, et al. Immediate
angioplasty versus standard therapy with rescue an-gioplasty after thrombolysis in the Combined Abcix-imab REteplase Stent Study in Acute MyocardialInfarction (CARESS-in-AMI): an open, prospective,randomised, multicentre trial. Lancet . 2008;371:559 –
568.
4.Cantor WJ, Fitchett D, Borgundvaag B, et al.
Routine early angioplasty after ﬁbrinolysis for acute
myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med . 2009;360:2705 –
2718 .
5.
Bohmer E, Hoffmann P, Abdelnoor M, et al. Ef ﬁcacy
and safety of immediate angioplasty versus ischemia-guided management after thrombolysis in acutemyocardial infarction in areas with very long transferdistances results of the NORDISTEMI (NORwegianstudy on DIstrict treatment of ST-elevation myocardial
infarction). J Am Coll Cardiol . 2010;55:102 –110.
6.Gershlick AH, Stephens-Lloyd A, Hughes S, et al.
Rescue angioplasty after failed thrombolytic therapyfor acute myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med .
2005;353:2758 –2768 .
7.Sutton AG, Campbell PG, Graham R, et al.
A randomized trial of rescue angioplasty versus aconservative approach for failed ﬁbrinolysis in ST-
segment elevation myocardial infarction: the Mid-dlesbrough Early Revascularization to Limit INfarction(MERLIN) trial. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2004;44:287 –296.
8.Wijeysundera HC, Vijayaraghavan R, Nallamothu BK,
et al. Rescue angioplasty or repeat ﬁbrinolysis after
failed ﬁbrinolytic therapy for ST-segment myocardial
infarction. A meta-analysis of randomized trials. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2007;49:422 –430.
9.Collet JP, Montalescot G, Le May M, et al. Percu-
taneous coronary intervention after ﬁbrinolysis: a
multiple meta-analyses approach according to thetype of strategy. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2006;48:1326 –
1335 .
10.Borgia F, Goodman SG, Halvorsen S, et al. Early
routine percutaneous coronary intervention afterﬁbrinolysis vs. standard therapy in ST-segment
elevation myocardial infarction: a meta-analysis. Eur
Heart J . 2010;31:2156 –2169 .
11.Fernandez-Aviles F, Alonso JJ, Castro-Beiras A,
et al. Routine invasive strategy within 24 hours ofthrombolysis versus ischaemia-guided conservativeapproach for acute myocardial infarction with ST-
segment elevation (GRACIA-1): a randomised
controlled trial. Lancet . 2004;364:1045 –1053 .
12.Lawton JS, Tamis-Holland JE, Bangalore S, et al.
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI guideline for coronary arteryrevascularization: a report of the American College ofCardiology/American Heart Association Joint Commit-tee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2022;79:e21 –e129 .
13.de Lemos JA, Braunwald E. ST segment resolution
as a tool for assessing the ef ﬁcacy of reperfusion
therapy. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2001;38:1283 –1294 .
14.Sutton AG, Campbell PG, Price DJ, et al. Failure of
thrombolysis by streptokinase: detection with a simple
electrocardiographic method. Heart . 2000;84:149 –156.
15.Mason PJ, Shah B, Tamis-Holland JE, et al. An
update on radial artery access and best practices for
transradial coronary angiography and intervention in
acute coronary syndrome: a scienti ﬁc statement from
the American Heart Association. Circ Cardiovasc Interv .
2018;11:e000035 .
16.Van de Werf F, Risti /C19c AD, Averkov OV, et al.
STREAM-2: half-dose tenecteplase or primary percuta-neous coronary intervention in older patients with ST-segment-elevation myocardial infarction: a random-ized, open-label trial. Circulation . 2023;148:753 –764.
17.Abdel-Qadir H, Yan AT, Tan M, et al. Consistency of
beneﬁt from an early invasive strategy after ﬁbrino-
lysis: a patient-level meta-analysis. Heart . 2015;101:
1554 –1561 .
18.Fazel R, Joseph TI, Sankardas MA, et al. Compari-
son of reperfusion strategies for ST-segment-elevation
myocardial infarction: a multivariate network meta-analysis. J Am Heart Assoc . 2020;9:e015186 .
19.Bainey KR, Armstrong PW, Zheng Y, et al. Phar-
macoinvasive strategy versus primary percutaneouscoronary intervention in ST-elevation myocardialinfarction in clinical practice: insights from the VitalHeart Response Registry. Circ Cardiovasc Interv .
2019;12:e008059 .
20.Madan M, Halvorsen S, Di Mario C, et al. Rela-
tionship between time to invasive assessment and
clinical outcomes of patients undergoing an early
invasive strategy after ﬁbrinolysis for ST-segment
elevation myocardial infarction: a patient-level anal-ysis of the randomized early routine invasive clinicaltrials. JACC Cardiovasc Interv . 2015;8:166 –174.
21.Ellis SG, Tendera M, de Belder MA, et al. Facilitated
PCI in patients with ST-elevation myocardial infarction.N Engl J Med . 2008;358:2205 –2217 .
6.1. Rationale and Timing for a Routine Invasive or
Selective Invasive Approach
1.Cannon CP, Weintraub WS, Demopoulos LA, et al.
Comparison of early invasive and conservative strate-
gies in patients with unstable coronary syndromes
treated with the glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitor tir-oﬁban. N Engl J Med . 2001;344:1879 –1887 .
2.Fox KA, Poole-Wilson PA, Henderson RA, et al.
Interventional versus conservative treatment forRao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372218

patients with unstable angina or non-ST-elevation
myocardial infarction: the British Heart FoundationRITA 3 randomised trial. Randomized Intervention Trialof unstable Angina. Lancet . 2002;360:743 –751.
3.Invasive compared with non-invasive treatment in
unstable coronary-artery disease: FRISC II prospec-
tive randomised multicentre study. Fragmin and FastRevascularisation during Instability in Coronary ar-tery disease Investigators. Lancet . 1999;354:708 –
715.
4.O’Donoghue M, Boden WE, Braunwald E, et al. Early
invasive vs conservative treatment strategies inwomen and men with unstable angina and non-ST-
segment elevation myocardial infarction: a meta-
analysis. JAMA . 2008;300:71 –80.
5.Mehta SR, Cannon CP, Fox KA, et al. Routine vs
selective invasive strategies in patients with acutecoronary syndromes: a collaborative meta-analysis ofrandomized trials. JAMA . 2005;293:2908 –2917 .
6.Fox KA, Clayton TC, Damman P, et al. Long-term
outcome of a routine versus selective invasive strategy
in patients with non-ST-segment elevation acute cor-
onary syndrome a meta-analysis of individual patientdata. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2010;55:2435 –2445 .
7.de Winter RJ, Windhausen F, Cornel JH, et al. Early
invasive versus selectively invasive management foracute coronary syndromes. N Engl J Med . 2005;353:
1095 –1104 .
8.Jobs A, Mehta SR, Montalescot G, et al.
Optimal timing of an invasive strategy in patients with
non-ST-elevation acute coronary syndrome: a meta-
analysis of randomised trials. Lancet . 2017;390:737 –
746.
9.Yoshida R, Ishii H, Morishima I, et al. Early versus
delayed invasive strategy in patients with non-ST-elevation acute coronary syndrome and concomitantcongestive heart failure. J Cardiol . 2019;74:320 –327.
10.Zoni CR, Mukherjee D, Gulati M. Proposed new
classi ﬁcation for acute coronary syndrome: acute cor-
onary syndrome requiring immediate reperfusion.Catheter Cardiovasc Interv . 2023;101:1177 –1181.
11.Mehta SR, Granger CB, Boden WE, et al. Early
versus delayed invasive intervention in acute coronarysyndromes. N Engl J Med . 2009;360:2165 –2175 .
12.Kofoed KF, Kelbæk H, Hansen PR, et al. Early
versus standard care invasive examination and treat-ment of patients with non-ST-segment elevation acute
coronary syndrome verdict randomized controlled
trial. Circulation . 2018;138:2741 –2750 .
13.Scanlon PJ, Faxon DP, Audet AM, et al. ACC/AHA
guidelines for coronary angiography. A report of theAmerican College of Cardiology/American Heart As-sociation Task Force on practice guidelines (Committeeon Coronary Angiography). Developed in collaboration
with the Society for Cardiac Angiography and In-
terventions. J Am Coll Cardiol . 1999;33:1756 –1824 .
14.Elgendy IY, Mahmoud AN, Wen X, Bavry AA. Meta-
analysis of randomized trials of long-term all-causemortality in patients with non-ST-elevation acutecoronary syndrome managed with routine invasiveversus selective invasive strategies. Am J Cardiol .
2017;119:560 –564.
15.Awan A, Ogunti R, Fatima U, et al. Timing of
percutaneous coronary intervention in non-ST eleva-tion acute coronary syndrome: meta-analysis andsystematic review of literature. Cardiovasc Revasc Med .
2020;21:1398 –1404 .
16.Kite TA, Kurmani SA, Bountziouka V, et al.
Timing of invasive strategy in non-ST-elevationacute coronary syndrome: a meta-analysis of ran-domized controlled trials. Eur Heart J . 2022;43:3148 –
3161.
17.Tamis-Holland JE, Jneid H, Reynolds HR, et al.
Contemporary diagnosis and management of patientswith myocardial infarction in the absence of obstruc-tive coronary artery disease: a scienti ﬁc statement
from the American Heart Association. Circulation .
2019;139:e891 –e908 .
18.Lawton JS, Tamis-Holland JE, Bangalore S, et al.
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI guideline for coronary arteryrevascularization: a report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Commit-
tee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2022;79:e21 –e129 .
7.1. Vascular Access Approach for PCI
1.Valgimigli M, Frigoli E, Leonardi S, et al. Radial
versus femoral access and bivalirudin versus unfrac-tionated heparin in invasively managed patients with
acute coronary syndrome (MATRIX): ﬁnal 1-year re-
sults of a multicentre, randomised controlled trial.Lancet . 2018;392:835 –848.
2.Bernat I, Horak D, Stasek J, et al. ST-segment
elevation myocardial infarction treated by radial orfemoral approach in a multicenter randomized clinicaltrial: the STEMI-RADIAL trial. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2014;63:964 –972.
3.Gargiulo G, Giacoppo D, Jolly SS, et al. Effects on
mortality and major bleeding of radial versus femoral
artery access for coronary angiography or percuta-neous coronary intervention: meta-analysis of indi-vidual patient data from 7 multicenter randomizedclinical trials. Circulation . 2022;146:1329 –1343 .
4.Andò G, Capodanno D. Radial versus femoral access
in invasively managed patients with acute coronarysyndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann
Intern Med . 2015;163:932 –940.
5.Andò G, Capodanno D. Radial access reduces mor-
tality in patients with acute coronary syndromes: re-
sults from an updated trial sequential analysis ofrandomized trials. JACC Cardiovasc Interv . 2016;9:
660 –670.
6.Valgimigli M, Gagnor A, Calabró P, et al. Radial
versus femoral access in patients with acute coronarysyndromes undergoing invasive management: a rand-omised multicentre trial. Lancet . 2015;385:2465 –
2476 .
7.Lawton JS, Tamis-Holland JE, Bangalore S, et al.
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI guideline for coronary arteryrevascularization: a report of the American College ofCardiology/American Heart Association Joint Commit-
tee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2022;79:e21 –e129 .
8.Masoudi FA, Ponirakis A, de Lemos JA, et al. Trends
in U.S. cardiovascular care: 2016 report from 4 ACC
national cardiovascular data registries. J Am Coll Car-
diol. 2017;69:1427 –1450 .
9.Kok MM, Weernink MGM, von Birgelen C, et al.
Patient preference for radial versus femoral vascular
access for elective coronary procedures: the PRE-
VAS study. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv .2 0 1 8 ; 9 1 :
17–24.10.Gaudino M, Benedetto U, Fremes S, et al. Associ-
ation of radial artery graft vs saphenous vein graft withlong-term cardiovascular outcomes among patientsundergoing coronary artery bypass grafting: a sys-
tematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA . 2020;324:
179–187.
11.Dahal K, Rijal J, Lee J, et al. Transulnar versus
transradial access for coronary angiography or percu-taneous coronary intervention: a meta-analysis ofrandomized controlled trials. Catheter Cardiovasc
Interv . 2016;87:857 –865.
12.Talha KM, Waqar E, Ashley KE, et al. Distal trans-
radial access compared to conventional trans-radialaccess in coronary interventions: a meta-analysis. Crit
Pathw Cardiol . 2022;21:176 –178.
13.Jolly SS, AlRashidi S, d ’Entremont MA, et al.
Routine ultrasonography guidance for femoral
vascular access for cardiac procedures: the UNIVERSAL
randomized clinical trial. JAMA Cardiol . 2022;7:
1110 –1118.
14.Ferrante G, Rao SV, Jüni P, et al. Radial versus
femoral access for coronary interventions across theentire spectrum of patients with coronary artery dis-ease: a meta-analysis of randomized trials. JACC Car-
diovasc Interv . 2016;9:1419 –1434 .
15.Le May M, Wells G, So D, et al. Safety and ef ﬁcacy
of femoral access vs radial access in ST-segment
elevation myocardial infarction: the SAFARI-STEMI
randomized clinical trial. JAMA Cardiol . 2020;5:
126–134.
7.2. Use of Aspiration Thrombectomy
1.Frobert O, Lagerqvist B, Olivecrona GK, et al.
Thrombus aspiration during ST-segment elevationmyocardial infarction. N Engl J Med . 2013;369:1587 –
1597 .
2.Jolly SS, Cairns JA, Yusuf S, et al. Randomized trial
of primary PCI with or without routine manual
thrombectomy. N Engl J Med . 2015;372:1389 –1398 .
3.Jolly SS, James S, D /C20zavík V, et al. Thrombus aspi-
ration in ST-segment-elevation myocardial infarction:
an individual patient meta-analysis: ThrombectomyTrialists Collaboration. Circulation . 2017;135:143 –152.
4.Stone GW, Maehara A, Witzenbichler B, et al.
Intracoronary abciximab and aspiration thrombectomyin patients with large anterior myocardial infarction:the INFUSE-AMI randomized trial. JAMA . 2012;307:
1817 –1826 .
5.Lawton JS, Tamis-Holland JE, Bangalore S, et al.
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI guideline for coronary arteryrevascularization: a report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Commit-
tee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2022;79:e21 –e129 .
6.Henriques JP, Zijlstra F, Ottervanger JP, et al. Inci-
dence and clinical signi ﬁcance of distal embolization
during primary angioplasty for acute myocardialinfarction. Eur Heart J . 2002;23:1112 –1117.
7.Stone GW, Peterson MA, Lansky AJ, et al. Impact of
normalized myocardial perfusion after successful an-gioplasty in acute myocardial infarction. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2002;39:591 –597.
8.Dudek D, Mielecki W, Burzotta F, et al. Thrombus
aspiration followed by direct stenting: a novel strategy
of primary percutaneous coronary intervention in ST-
segment elevation myocardial infarction. Results ofJACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2219

the Polish-Italian-Hungarian RAndomized ThrombEc-
tomy Trial (PIHRATE Trial). Am Heart J . 2010;160:
966 –972.
9.Sardella G, Mancone M, Bucciarelli-Ducci C, et al.
Thrombus aspiration during primary percutaneouscoronary intervention improves myocardial reperfusionand reduces infarct size: the EXPIRA (thrombectomy
with export catheter in infarct-related artery during
primary percutaneous coronary intervention) pro-spective, randomized trial. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2009;53:
309 –315.
10.Svilaas T, Vlaar PJ, van der Horst IC, et al.
Thrombus aspiration during primary percutaneouscoronary intervention. N Engl J Med . 2008;358:
557–567.
11.Vlaar PJ, Svilaas T, van der Horst IC, et al. Cardiac
death and reinfarction after 1 year in the ThrombusAspiration during Percutaneous coronary intervention
in Acute myocardial infarction Study (TAPAS): a 1-year
follow-up study. Lancet . 2008;371:1915 –1920 .
12.Jolly SS, Cairns JA, Yusuf S, et al. Outcomes after
thrombus aspiration for ST elevation myocardialinfarction: 1-year follow-up of the prospective rando-mised TOTAL trial. Lancet (London, England) .
2016;387:127 –135.
13.Lagerqvist B, Fröbert O, Olivecrona GK, et al.
Outcomes 1 year after thrombus aspiration formyocardial infarction. N Engl J Med . 2014;371:
1111–1120 .
7.3. Use of Intracoronary Imaging
1.Lee JM, Choi KH, Song YB, et al. Intravascular
imaging-guided or angiography-guided complex PCI.N Engl J Med . 2023;388:1668 –1679 .
2.Ali ZA, Landmesser U, Maehara A, et al. Optical
coherence tomography-guided versus angiography-guided PCI. N Engl J Med . 2023;389:1466 –1476 .
3.Hong SJ, Mintz GS, Ahn CM, et al. Effect of intra-
vascular ultrasound-guided drug-eluting stent im-plantation: 5-year follow-up of the IVUS-XPLrandomized trial. JACC Cardiovasc Interv . 2020;13:
62–71.
4.Holm NR, Andreasen LN, Neghabat O, et al. OCT or
angiography guidance for PCI in complex bifurcationlesions. N Engl J Med . 2023;389:1477 –1487 .
5.Gao XF, Ge Z, Kong XQ, et al. 3-year outcomes of
the ULTIMATE trial comparing intravascular ultrasound
versus angiography-guided drug-eluting stent im-
plantation. JACC Cardiovasc Interv . 2021;14:247 –257.
6.Kang DY, Ahn JM, Yun SC, et al. Guiding interven-
tion for complex coronary lesions by optical coherence
tomography or intravascular ultrasound. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2024;83:401 –413.
7.Ali ZA, Maehara A, Genereux P, et al. Optical
coherence tomography compared with intravascularultrasound and with angiography to guide coronarystent implantation (ILUMIEN III: OPTIMIZE PCI): arandomised controlled trial. Lancet . 2016;388:2618 –
2628 .
8.Kubo T, Shinke T, Okamura T, et al. Optical fre-
quency domain imaging vs. intravascular ultrasound in
percutaneous coronary intervention (OPINION trial):
one-year angiographic and clinical results. Eur Heart J .
2017;38:3139 –3147 .
9.Chamie D, Costa JR Jr, Damiani LP, et al. Optical
coherence tomography versus intravascular ultrasoundand angiography to guide percutaneous coronary in-
terventions: the iSIGHT randomized trial. Circ Car-
diovasc Interv . 2021;14:e009452 .
10.Muramatsu T, Ozaki Y, Nanasato M, et al. Com-
parison between optical frequency domain imagingand intravascular ultrasound for percutaneous coro-nary intervention guidance in biolimus A9-eluting
stent implantation: a randomized MISTIC-1 non-infe-
riority trial. Circ Cardiovasc Interv . 2020;13:e009314 .
11.Stone GW, Christiansen EH, Ali ZA, et al. Intravas-
cular imaging-guided coronary drug-eluting stent im-plantation: an updated network meta-analysis. Lancet .
2024;403:824 –837.
12.Lawton JS, Tamis-Holland JE, Bangalore S, et al.
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI guideline for coronary arteryrevascularization: a report of the American College ofCardiology/American Heart Association Joint Commit-tee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2022;79:e21 –e129 .
13.Ladwiniec A, Walsh SJ, Holm NR, et al. Intravas-
cular ultrasound to guide left main stem intervention:
a NOBLE trial substudy. EuroIntervention . 2020;16:
201–209.
14.Maehara A, Matsumura M, Ali ZA, et al. IVUS-
guided versus OCT-guided coronary stent implanta-tion: a critical appraisal. JACC Cardiovasc Interv .
2017;10:1487 –1503 .
15.Truesdell AG, Alasnag MA, Kaul P, et al. Intravas-
cular imaging during percutaneous coronary interven-tion: JACC state-of-the-art review. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2023;81:590 –605.
16.Prati F, Romagnoli E, Burzotta F, et al. Clinical
impact of OCT ﬁndings during PCI: the CLI-OPCI II
study. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging . 2015;8:1297 –1305 .
17.Soeda T, Uemura S, Park SJ, et al. Incidence and
clinical signi ﬁcance of poststent optical coherence
tomography ﬁndings: one-year follow-up study from a
multicenter registry. Circulation . 2015;132:1020 –1029 .
18.Giacoppo D, Laudani C, Occhipinti G, et al. Coro-
nary angiography, intravascular ultrasound, and opti-
cal coherence tomography for guiding of percutaneouscoronary intervention: a systematic review andnetwork meta-analysis. Circulation . 2024;149:1065 –
1086 .
7.4.1. Management of Multivessel CAD in STEMI
1.Mehta SR, Wood DA, Storey RF, et al. Complete
revascularization with multivessel PCI for myocardial
infarction. N Engl J Med . 2019;381:1411 –1421.
2.Gershlick AH, Khan JN, Kelly DJ, et al. Randomized
trial of complete versus lesion-only revascularization
in patients undergoing primary percutaneous coronaryintervention for STEMI and multivessel disease: theCvLPRIT trial. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2015;65:963 –972.
3.Bainey KR, Engstrøm T, Smits PC, et al. Complete vs
culprit-lesion-only revascularization for ST-segmentelevation myocardial infarction: a systematic reviewand meta-analysis. JAMA Cardiol . 2020;5:881 –888.
4.Engstrom T, Kelbaek H, Helqvist S, et al. Complete
revascularisation versus treatment of the culprit lesiononly in patients with ST-segment elevation myocardial
infarction and multivessel disease (DANAMI-3-
PRIMULTI): an open-label, randomised controlledtrial. Lancet . 2015;386:665 –671.
5.Di Mario C, Mara S, Flavio A, et al. Single vs multi-
vessel treatment during primary angioplasty: results ofthe multicentre randomised HEpacoat for cuLPrit or
multivessel stenting for Acute Myocardial Infarction(HELP AMI) Study. Int J Cardiovasc Intervent . 2004;6:
128–133.
6.Politi L, Sgura F, Rossi R, et al. A randomised trial of
target-vessel versus multi-vessel revascularisation inST-elevation myocardial infarction: major adverse
cardiac events during long-term follow-up. Heart .
2010;96:662 –667.
7.Smits PC, Abdel-Wahab M, Neumann FJ, et al.
Fractional ﬂow reserve-guided multivessel angioplasty
in myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med . 2017;376:1234 –
1244 .
8.Wald DS, Morris JK, Wald NJ, et al. Randomized trial
of preventive angioplasty in myocardial infarction.N Engl J Med . 2013;369:1115 –1123.
9.Mehta SR, Wang J, Wood DA, et al. Complete
revascularization vs culprit lesion-only percutaneous
coronary intervention for angina-related quality of lifein patients with ST-segment Elevation myocardial
infarction: results from the COMPLETE randomized
clinical trial. JAMA Cardiol . 2022;7:1091 –1099 .
10.Diletti R, den Dekker WK, Bennett J, et al. Imme-
diate versus staged complete revascularisation in pa-
tients presenting with acute coronary syndrome andmultivessel coronary disease (BIOVASC): a prospective,open-label, non-inferiority, randomised trial. Lancet .
2023;401:1172 –1182.
11.Stahli BE, Varbella F, Linke A, et al. Timing of
complete revascularization with multivessel PCI formyocardial infarction. N Engl J Med . 2023;389:1368 –
1379 .
12.Maqsood MH, Tamis-Holland JE, Rao SV, et al.
Culprit-only revascularization, single-setting complete
revascularization, and staged complete revasculariza-
tion in acute myocardial infarction: insights from amixed treatment comparison meta-analysis of ran-domized trials. Circ Cardiovasc Interv . 2024;17:
e013737 .
13.Thiele H, Akin I, Sandri M, et al. PCI strategies in
patients with acute myocardial infarction and cardio-genic shock. N Engl J Med . 2017;377:2419 –2432 .
14.Thiele H, Akin I, Sandri M, et al. One-year outcomes
after PCI strategies in cardiogenic shock. N Engl J Med .
2018;379:1699 –1710 .
15.Kolte D, Sardar P, Khera S, et al. Culprit vessel-only
versus multivessel percutaneous coronary intervention
in patients with cardiogenic shock complicating ST-
segment-elevation myocardial infarction: a collabora-tive meta-analysis. Circ Cardiovasc Interv . 2017;10:
e005582 .
16.Lawton JS, Tamis-Holland JE, Bangalore S, et al.
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI guideline for coronary arteryrevascularization: a report of the American College ofCardiology/American Heart Association Joint Commit-tee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2022;79:e21 –e129 .
17.Puymirat E, Cayla G, Simon T, et al. Multivessel PCI
guided by FFR or angiography for myocardial infarc-
tion. N Engl J Med . 2021;385:297 –308.
18.Lee JM, Kim HK, Park KH, et al. Fractional ﬂow
reserve versus angiography-guided strategy in acute
myocardial infarction with multivessel disease: a ran-domized trial. Eur Heart J . 2023;44:473 –484.
19.Reddy RK, Howard JP, Jamil Y, et al. Percutaneous
coronary revascularization strategies after myocardialRao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372220

infarction: a systematic review and network meta-
analysis. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2024;84:276 –294.
20.Farkouh ME, Domanski M, Sleeper LA, et al. Stra-
tegies for multivessel revascularization in patients withdiabetes. N Engl J Med . 2012;367:2375 –2384 .
21.Kappetein AP, Head SJ, Morice MC, et al. Treat-
ment of complex coronary artery disease in patientswith diabetes: 5-year results comparing outcomes ofbypass surgery and percutaneous coronary interven-tion in the SYNTAX trial. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg .
2013;43:1006 –1013 .
22.Head SJ, Milojevic M, Daemen J, et al. Mortality
after coronary artery bypass grafting versus percuta-neous coronary intervention with stenting for coronary
artery disease: a pooled analysis of individual patient
data. Lancet . 2018;391:939 –948.
23.Morice MC, Serruys PW, Kappetein AP, et al. Five-
year outcomes in patients with left main disease
treated with either percutaneous coronary interven-tion or coronary artery bypass grafting in the synergybetween percutaneous coronary intervention withtaxus and cardiac surgery trial. Circulation . 2014;129:
2388 –2394 .
24.Mohr FW, Morice MC, Kappetein AP, et al. Coro-
nary artery bypass graft surgery versus percutaneouscoronary intervention in patients with three-vesseldisease and left main coronary disease: 5-year
follow-up of the randomised, clinical SYNTAX trial.
Lancet . 2013;381:629 –638.
7.4.2. Management of Multivessel CAD in NSTE-ACS
1.Biscaglia S, Guiducci V, Escaned J, et al. Complete or
culprit-only PCI in older patients with myocardialinfarction. N Engl J Med . 2023;389:889 –898.
2.Rathod KS, Koganti S, Jain AK, et al. Complete
versus culprit-only lesion intervention in patients withacute coronary syndromes. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2018;72:
1989 –1999 .
3.Siebert VR, Borgaonkar S, Jia X, et al. Meta-analysis
comparing multivessel versus culprit coronary arterialrevascularization for patients with non-ST-segmentelevation acute coronary syndromes. Am J Cardiol .
2019;124:1501 –1511.
4.Sardella G, Lucisano L, Garbo R, et al. Single-staged
compared with multi-staged PCI in multivesselNSTEMI patients: the SMILE trial. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2016;67:264 –272.
5.Diletti R, den Dekker WK, Bennett J, et al. Imme-
diate versus staged complete revascularisation in pa-
tients presenting with acute coronary syndrome and
multivessel coronary disease (BIOVASC): a prospective,open-label, non-inferiority, randomised trial. Lancet .
2023;401:1172 –1182.
6.
Reddy RK, Howard JP, Jamil Y, et al. Percutaneous
coronary revascularization strategies after myocardialinfarction: a systematic review and network meta-analysis. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2024;84:276 –294.
7.Sels JW, Tonino PA, Siebert U, et al. Fractional ﬂow
reserve in unstable angina and non-ST-segmentelevation myocardial infarction experience from theFAME (Fractional ﬂow reserve versus Angiography for
Multivessel Evaluation) study. JACC Cardiovasc Interv .
2011;4:1183 –1189 .
8.Layland J, Oldroyd KG, Curzen N, et al. Fractional
ﬂow reserve vs. angiography in guiding managementto optimize outcomes in non-ST-segment elevation
myocardial infarction: the British Heart FoundationFAMOUS-NSTEMI randomized trial. Eur Heart J .
2015;36:100 –111.
9.Lee JM, Kim HK, Park KH, et al. Fractional
ﬂow reserve versus angiography-guided strategy
in acute myocardial infarction with multivessel
disease: a randomized trial. Eur Heart J .2 0 2 3 ; 4 4 :
473–484.
10.Thiele H, Akin I, Sandri M, et al. PCI strategies in
patients with acute myocardial infarction and cardio-
genic shock. N Engl J Med . 2017;377:2419 –2432 .
11.Thiele H, Akin I, Sandri M, et al. One-year outcomes
after PCI strategies in cardiogenic shock. N Engl J Med .
2018;379:1699 –1710 .
12.Lawton JS, Tamis-Holland JE, Bangalore S, et al.
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI guideline for coronary artery
revascularization: a report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Commit-tee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2022;79:e21 –e129 .
13.Heitner JF, Senthilkumar A, Harrison JK, et al.
Identifying the infarct-related artery in patients withnon-ST-segment-elevation myocardial infarction. Circ
Cardiovasc Interv . 2019;12:e007305 .
14.Brener SJ, Milford-Beland S, Roe MT, et al. Culprit-
only or multivessel revascularization in patients withacute coronary syndromes: an American College ofCardiology National Cardiovascular Database Registryreport. Am Heart J . 2008;155:140 –146.
15.Hanratty CG, Koyama Y, Rasmussen HH, et al.
Exaggeration of nonculprit stenosis severity duringacute myocardial infarction: implications for immedi-
ate multivessel revascularization. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2002;40:911 –916.
16.Van Belle E, Baptista SB, Raposo L, et al. Impact of
routine fractional ﬂow reserve on management deci-
sion and 1-year clinical outcome of patients with acutecoronary syndromes: PRIME-FFR (Insights from thePOST-IT [Portuguese Study on the Evaluation of FFR-Guided Treatment of Coronary Disease] and R3F[French FFR Registry] Integrated Multicenter Regis-
tries —Implementation of FFR [Fractional Flow
Reserve] in Routine Practice). Circ Cardiovasc Interv .
2017;10:e004296 .
17.Head SJ, Milojevic M, Daemen J, et al. Mortality
after coronary artery bypass grafting versus percuta-
neous coronary intervention with stenting for coronaryartery disease: a pooled analysis of individual patientdata. Lancet . 2018;391:939 –948.
18.Sabatine MS, Bergmark BA, Murphy SA, et al.
Percutaneous coronary intervention with drug-eluting stents versus coronary artery bypass graft-ing in left main coronary artery disease: an individualpatient data meta-analysis. Lancet . 2021;398:2247 –
2257 .
19.Farkouh ME, Domanski M, Sleeper LA, et al. Stra-
tegies for multivessel revascularization in patients with
diabetes. N Engl J Med . 2012;367:2375 –2384 .
20.Velazquez EJ, Lee KL, Jones RH, et al. Coro-
nary-artery bypass surgery in patients with ischemiccardiomyopathy. NE n g lJM e d . 2016;374:1511 –
1520 .
21.Parikh SV, de Lemos JA, Jessen ME, et al. Timing of
in-hospital coronary artery bypass graft surgery fornon-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction pa-
tients results from the National Cardiovascular DataRegistry ACTION Registry-GWTG (Acute CoronaryTreatment and Intervention Outcomes Network
Registry-Get With The Guidelines). JACC Cardiovasc
Interv . 2010;3:419 –427.
22.Davierwala PM, Verevkin A, Leontyev S, et al. Does
timing of coronary artery bypass surgery affect earlyand long-term outcomes in patients with non-ST-segment-elevation myocardial infarction? Circulation .
2015;132:731 –740.
23.Nichols EL, McCullough JN, Ross CS, et al. Optimal
timing from myocardial infarction to coronary arterybypass grafting on hospital mortality. Ann Thorac Surg .
2017;103:162 –171.
24.Elscot JJ, Kakar H, Scarparo P, et al. Timing of
complete multivessel revascularization in patients
presenting with non-ST-segment elevation acute cor-onary syndrome. JACC Cardiovasc Interv . 2024;17:
771–782.
8.1. Revascularization in ACS With Cardiogenic Shock
1.Scholz KH, Maier SKG, Maier LS, et al. Impact of
treatment delay on mortality in ST-segmentelevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) patientspresenting with and without haemodynamic insta-bility: results from the German prospective, multi-
centre FITT-STEMI trial. Eur Heart J . 2018;39:1065 –
1074 .
2.Hochman JS, Sleeper LA, Webb JG, et al. Early
revascularization in acute myocardial infarction
complicated by cardiogenic shock. SHOCK In-
vestigators. Should we emergently revascularize
occluded coronaries for cardiogenic shock. N Engl J
Med. 1999;341:625 –634.
3.Axelsson TA, Mennander A, Malmberg M, et al. Is
emergency and salvage coronary artery bypass graft-ing justi ﬁed? The Nordic emergency/salvage coronary
artery bypass grafting study. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg .
2016;49:1451 –1456 .
4.Liakopoulos OJ, Schlachtenberger G, Wendt D,
et al. Early clinical outcomes of surgical myocardialrevascularization for acute coronary syndromescomplicated by cardiogenic shock: a report fromthe North-Rhine-Westphalia Surgical MyocardialInfarction Registry. JA mH e a r tA s s o c . 2019;8:
e012049 .
5.Thiele H, Akin I, Sandri M, et al. PCI strategies in
patients with acute myocardial infarction and cardio-
genic shock. N Engl J Med . 2017;377:2419 –2432 .
6.Thiele H, Akin I, Sandri M, et al. One-year outcomes
after PCI strategies in cardiogenic shock. N Engl J Med .
2018;379:1699 –1710 .
7.Kolte D, Sardar P, Khera S, et al. Culprit vessel-only
versus multivessel percutaneous coronary interventionin patients with cardiogenic shock complicating ST-segment-elevation myocardial infarction: a collabora-
tive meta-analysis. Circ Cardiovasc Interv . 2017;10:
e005582 .
8.Lawton JS, Tamis-Holland JE, Bangalore S, et al.
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI guideline for coronary arteryrevascularization: a report of the American College ofCardiology/American Heart Association Joint Commit-tee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2022;79:e21 –e129 .JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2221

9.Mehta RH, Lopes RD, Ballotta A, et al. Percutaneous
coronary intervention or coronary artery bypass sur-gery for cardiogenic shock and multivessel coronaryartery disease? Am Heart J . 2010;159:141 –147.
10.Hochman JS, Sleeper LA, White HD, et al. One-year
survival following early revascularization for cardio-genic shock. JAMA . 2001;285:190 –192.
11.Hochman JS, Sleeper LA, Webb JG, et al. Early
revascularization and long-term survival in cardiogenic
shock complicating acute myocardial infarction. JAMA .
2006;295:2511 –2515 .
12.Smilowitz NR, Alviar CL, Katz SD, Hochman JS.
Coronary artery bypass grafting versus percutaneous
coronary intervention for myocardial infarction
complicated by cardiogenic shock. Am Heart J .
2020;226:255 –263.
8.2. MCS in Patients With ACS and Cardiogenic Shock
1.Moller JE, Engstrom T, Jensen LO, et al.
Microaxial ﬂow pump or standard care in infarct-
related cardiogenic shock. N Engl J Med . 2024;390:
1382 –1393 .
2.Ronco D, Matteucci M, Ravaux JM, et al. Mechanical
circulatory support as a bridge to de ﬁnitive treatment
in post-infarction ventricular septal rupture. JACC
Cardiovasc Interv . 2021;14:1053 –1066 .
3.Matteucci M, Fina D, Jiritano F, et al. The use of
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation in the settingof postinfarction mechanical complications: outcome
analysis of the Extracorporeal Life Support Organiza-
tion Registry. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg .
2020;31:369 –374.
4.Elbadawi A, Elgendy IY, Mahmoud K, et al. Tem-
poral trends and outcomes of mechanical complica-
tions in patients with acute myocardial infarction. JACC
Cardiovasc Interv . 2019;12:1825 –1836 .
5.Thiele H, Zeymer U, Neumann FJ, et al. Intraaortic
balloon support for myocardial infarction withcardiogenic shock. N Engl J Med . 2012;367:1287 –1296 .
6.Thiele H, Zeymer U, Neumann FJ, et al. Intra-aortic
balloon counterpulsation in acute myocardial infarc-tion complicated by cardiogenic shock (IABP-SHOCKII):ﬁnal 12 month results of a randomised, open-label
trial. Lancet . 2013;382:1638 –1645
.
7.Thiele H, Zeymer U, Thelemann N, et al. Intraaortic
balloon pump in cardiogenic shock complicating acutemyocardial infarction: long-term 6-year outcome ofthe randomized IABP-SHOCK II trial. Circulation .
2019;139:395 –403.
8.Ostadal P, Rokyta R, Karasek J, et al. Extracorporeal
membrane oxygenation in the therapy of cardiogenicshock: results of the ECMO-CS randomized clinicaltrial. Circulation . 2023;147:454 –464.
9.Thiele H, Zeymer U, Akin I, et al. Extracorporeal life
support in infarct-related cardiogenic shock. N Engl J
Med. 2023;389:1286 –1297 .
10.Helgestad OKL, Josiassen J, Hassager C, et al.
Temporal trends in incidence and patient characteris-
tics in cardiogenic shock following acute myocardial
infarction from 2010 to 2017: a Danish cohort study.Eur J Heart Fail . 2019;21:1370 –1378 .
11.Jentzer JC, van Diepen S, Barsness GW, et al.
Cardiogenic shock classi ﬁcation to predict mortality inthe cardiac intensive care unit. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2019;74:2117 –2128 .
12.Dhruva SS, Ross JS, Mortazavi BJ, et al. Association
of use of an intravascular microaxial left ventricularassist device vs intra-aortic balloon pump with in-hospital mortality and major bleeding among pa-tients with acute myocardial infarction complicated bycardiogenic shock. JAMA . 2020;323:734 –745.
13.Miller PE, Brom ﬁeld SG, Ma Q, et al. Clinical out-
comes and cost associated with an intravascularmicroaxial left ventricular assist device vs intra-aorticballoon pump in patients presenting with acute
myocardial infarction complicated by cardiogenic
shock. JAMA Intern Med . 2022;182:926 –933.
14.Bochaton T, Huot L, Elbaz M, et al. Mechanical
circulatory support with the Impella /C226LP5.0 pump and
an intra-aortic balloon pump for cardiogenic shock in
acute myocardial infarction: the IMPELLA-STIC ran-domized study. Arch Cardiovasc Dis . 2020;113:237 –
243.
15.Ouweneel DM, Eriksen E, Seyfarth M, Henriques JP.
Percutaneous mechanical circulatory support versusintra-aortic balloon pump for treating cardiogenicshock: meta-analysis. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2017;69:358 –
360.
16.Seyfarth M, Sibbing D, Bauer I, et al. A randomized
clinical trial to evaluate the safety and ef ﬁcacy of a
percutaneous left ventricular assist device versusintra-aortic balloon pumping for treatment of cardio-genic shock caused by myocardial infarction. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2008;52:1584 –1588 .
17.
Seto AH, Abu-Fadel MS, Sparling JM, et al. Real-
time ultrasound guidance facilitates femoral arterialaccess and reduces vascular complications: FAUST(Femoral Arterial Access With Ultrasound Trial). JACC
Cardiovasc Interv . 2010;3:751 –758.
18.Sobolev M, Slovut DP, Lee Chang A, et al. Ultra-
sound-guided catheterization of the femoral artery: asystematic review and meta-analysis of randomized
controlled trials. J Invasive Cardiol . 2015;27:318 –323.
19.Jolly SS, AlRashidi S, d ’Entremont MA, et al.
Routine ultrasonography guidance for femoralvascular access for cardiac procedures: the UNIVERSAL
randomized clinical trial. JAMA Cardiol . 2022;7:1110 –
1118.
20.Hochman JS, Sleeper LA, Webb JG, et al. Early
revascularization in acute myocardial infarction
complicated by cardiogenic shock. SHOCK In-
vestigators. Should we emergently revascularizeoccluded coronaries for cardiogenic shock. N Engl J
Med. 1999;341:625 –634.
21.Zeymer U, Freund A, Hochadel M, et al. Venoar-
terial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation in pa-tients with infarct-related cardiogenic shock: anindividual patient data meta-analysis of randomisedtrials. Lancet . 2023;402:1338 –1346 .
9.1. Mechanical Complications
1.Ronco D, Matteucci M, Ravaux JM, et al. Mechanical
circulatory support as a bridge to de ﬁnitive treatment
in post-infarction ventricular septal rupture. JACC
Cardiovasc Interv . 2021;14:1053 –1066 .
2.Matteucci M, Fina D, Jiritano F, et al. The use of
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation in the settingof postinfarction mechanical complications: outcomeanalysis of the Extracorporeal Life Support Organiza-
tion Registry. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg .
2020;31:369 –374.
3.Elbadawi A, Elgendy IY, Mahmoud K, et al. Temporal
trends and outcomes of mechanical complications in
patients with acute myocardial infarction. JACC Car-
diovasc Interv . 2019;12:1825 –1836 .
4.French JK, Hellkamp AS, Armstrong PW, et al.
Mechanical complications after percutaneous coro-nary intervention in ST-elevation myocardial infarc-tion (from APEX-AMI). Am J Cardiol . 2010;105:
59–63.
5.Lemery R, Smith HC, Giuliani ER, Gersh BJ. Prog-
nosis in rupture of the ventricular septum after acutemyocardial infarction and role of early surgical inter-vention. Am J Cardiol . 1992;70:147 –151.
6.Crenshaw BS, Granger CB, Birnbaum Y, et al. Risk
factors, angiographic patterns, and outcomes in pa-
tients with ventricular septal defect complicating
acute myocardial infarction. GUSTO-I (Global Utiliza-
tion of Streptokinase and TPA for Occluded CoronaryArteries) Trial Investigators. Circulation . 2000;101:27 –
32.
7.Kilic A, Sultan I, Chu D, et al. Mitral valve surgery for
papillary muscle rupture: outcomes in 1342 patientsfrom the Society of Thoracic Surgeons database. Ann
Thorac Surg . 2020;110:1975 –1981 .
8.Matteucci M, Ronco D, Ravaux JM, et al. Surgical
repair of post-infarction ventricular free-wall rupturein the Netherlands: data from a nationwide registry.Ann Cardiothorac Surg . 2022;11:310 –318.
9.Menon V, Webb JG, Hillis LD, et al. Outcome and
proﬁle of ventricular septal rupture with cardiogenic
shock after myocardial infarction: a report from the
SHOCK Trial Registry. Should we emergently revascu-
larize occluded coronaries in cardiogenic shock? JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2000;36:1110 –1116.
10.Jones BM, Kapadia SR, Smedira NG, et al. Ven-
tricular septal rupture complicating acute myocardialinfarction: a contemporary review. Eur Heart J .
2014;35:2060 –2068 .
11.Sakaguchi G, Miyata H, Motomura N, et al. Surgical
repair of post-infarction ventricular septal defect-
ﬁndings from a Japanese national database. Circ J .
2019;83:2229 –2235 .
12.Arnaoutakis GJ, Zhao Y, George TJ, et al. Surgical
repair of ventricular septal defect after myocardialinfarction: outcomes from the Society of ThoracicSurgeons National Database. Ann Thorac Surg .
2012;94:436 –443. discussion 443-434 .
13.Morimura H, Tabata M. Delayed surgery after me-
chanical circulatory support for ventricular septalrupture with cardiogenic shock. Interact Cardiovasc
Thorac Surg . 2020;31:868 –873.
14.Furui M, Sakurai Y, Kakii B, et al. Bene ﬁts and risks
of delayed surgery for ventricular septal rupture after
acute myocardial infarction. Int Heart J . 2022;63:433 –
440.
15.Schlotter F, de Waha S, Eitel I, et al. Interventional
post-myocardial infarction ventricular septal defectclosure: a systematic review of current evidence.EuroIntervention . 2016;12:94 –102.
16.Giblett JP, Matetic A, Jenkins D, et al. Post-
infarction ventricular septal defect: percutaneous orRao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372222

surgical management in the UK national registry. Eur
Heart J . 2022;43:5020 –5032 .
17.Perez-Villa B, Cubeddu RJ, Brozzi N, et al. Transi-
tion to heart transplantation in post-myocardialinfarction ventricular septal rupture: a systematic re-
view. Heart Fail Rev . 2023;28:217 –227.
18.Morrow DA, Fang JC, Fintel DJ, et al. Evolution of
critical care cardiology: transformation of the cardio-vascular intensive care unit and the emerging need fornew medical staf ﬁng and training models: a scienti ﬁc
statement from the American Heart Association. Cir-
culation . 2012;126:1408 –1428 .
19.Papolos AI, Kenigsberg BB, Berg DD, et al. Man-
agement and outcomes of cardiogenic shock in cardiac
ICUs with versus without shock teams. J Am Coll Car-
diol. 2021;78:1309 –1317.
20.Tehrani BN, Truesdell AG, Sherwood MW, et al.
Standardized team-based care for cardiogenic shock.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;73:1659 –1669 .
21.Slater J, Brown RJ, Antonelli TA, et al. Cardiogenic
shock due to cardiac free-wall rupture or tamponadeafter acute myocardial infarction: a report from the
SHOCK Trial Registry. Should we emergently revascu-
larize occluded coronaries for cardiogenic shock? JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2000;36:1117 –1122.
22.Thompson CR, Buller CE, Sleeper LA, et al.
Cardiogenic shock due to acute severe mitral regurgi-tation complicating acute myocardial infarction: areport from the SHOCK Trial Registry. Should we use
emergently revascularize occluded coronaries in
cardiogenic shock? J Am Coll Cardiol . 2000;36:1104 –
1109 .
23.Valle JA, Miyasaka RL, Carroll JD. Acute mitral
regurgitation secondary to papillary muscle tear: istranscatheter edge-to-edge mitral valve repair a newparadigm? Circ Cardiovasc Interv . 2017;10:e005050 .
24.Thiele H, Lauer B, Hambrecht R, et al. Short and
long-term hemodynamic effects of intra-aortic balloon
support in ventricular septal defect complicating acutemyocardial infarction. Am J Cardiol . 2003;92:450 –
454.
25.Damluji AA, van Diepen S, Katz JN, et al. Me-
chanical complications of acute myocardial infarction:a scienti ﬁc statement from the American Heart Asso-
ciation. Circulation . 2021;144:e16 –e35.
9.2. Electrical Complications and Prevention of
Sudden Cardiac Death After ACS
1.Moss AJ, Hall WJ, Cannom DS, et al. Improved sur-
vival with an implanted de ﬁbrillator in patients with
coronary disease at high risk for ventricular
arrhythmia. N Engl J Med . 1996;335:1933 –1940 .
2.Moss AJ, Zareba W, Hall WJ, et al. Prophylactic
implantation of a de ﬁbrillator in patients with
myocardial infarction and reduced ejection fraction.
N Engl J Med . 2002;346:877 –883.
3.Bardy GH, Lee KL, Mark DB, et al. Amiodarone or an
implantable cardioverter-de ﬁbrillator for congestive
heart failure. N Engl J Med . 2005;352:225 –237.
4.Buxton AE, Lee KL, Fisher JD, et al. A randomized
study of the prevention of sudden death in patientswith coronary artery disease. Multicenter UnsustainedTachycardia Trial Investigators. N Engl J Med .
1999;341:1882 –1890 .
5.Solomon SD, Zelenkofske S, McMurray JJ, et al.
Sudden death in patients with myocardial infarctionand left ventricular dysfunction, heart failure, or both.
N Engl J Med . 2005;352:2581 –2588 .
6.Zaman S, Sivagangabalan G, Narayan A, et al. Out-
comes of early risk strati ﬁcation and targeted
implantable cardioverter-de ﬁbrillator implantation
after ST-elevation myocardial infarction treated with
primary percutaneous coronary intervention. Circula-
tion. 2009;120:194 –200.
7.Olgin JE, Pletcher MJ, Vittinghoff E, et al. Wearable
cardioverter-de ﬁbrillator after myocardial infarction.
N Engl J Med . 2018;379:1205 –1215.
8.Kim H-L, Kim S-H, Seo J-B, et al. In ﬂuence of
second-and third-degree heart block on 30-dayoutcome following acute myocardial infarction in the
drug-eluting stent era. Am J Cardiol . 2014;114:1658 –
1662 .
9.Wang P, Wang S, Liu Z, et al. Prognostic value of
temporary pacemaker insertion in patients with acutemyocardial infarction in the era of percutaneous cor-onary revascularization. Rev Cardiovasc Med . 2023;
24:179 .
10.Joglar JA, Chung MK, Armbruster AL, et al. 2023
ACC/AHA/ACCP/HRS guideline for the diagnosis and
management of atrial ﬁbrillation: a report of the
American College of Cardiology/American Heart As-sociation Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guide-lines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2024;83:109 –
279.
11.Thomsen AF, Jacobsen PK, Køber L, et al. Risk of
arrhythmias after myocardial infarction in patientswith left ventricular systolic dysfunction according
to mode of revascularization: a Cardiac Arrhythmias
and RIsk Strati ﬁcation after Myocardial infArction
(CARISMA) substudy. EP: Europace . 2021;23:
616–623.
12.Rymer JA, Wegermann ZK, Wang TY, et al. Ven-
tricular arrhythmias after primary percutaneous coro-nary intervention for STEMI. JAMA Netw Open . 2024;7:
e2410288 .
13.Buxton AE, Lee KL, DiCarlo L, et al. Electrophysi-
ologic testing to identify patients with coronary arterydisease who are at risk for sudden death. MulticenterUnsustained Tachycardia Trial Investigators. N Engl J
Med. 2000;342:1937 –1945 .
14.Bigger JT Jr. CABG Patch Trial Investigators. Pro-
phylactic use of implanted cardiac de ﬁbrillators in
patients at high risk for ventricular arrhythmias after
coronary-artery bypass graft surgery. Coronary Artery
Bypass Graft (CABG) Patch Trial Investigators. N Engl J
Med. 1997;337:1569 –1575 .
15.Hohnloser SH, Kuck KH, Dorian P, et al. Prophy-
lactic use of an implantable cardioverter –deﬁbrillator
after acute myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med .
2004;351:2481 –2488 .
16.Steinbeck G, Andresen D, Seidl K, et al. De ﬁbril-
lator implantation early after myocardial infarction.
N Engl J Med . 2009;361:1427 –1436 .
17.Podolecki T, Lenarczyk R, Kowalczyk J, et al.
Prognostic signi ﬁcance of complex ventricular ar-
rhythmias complicating ST-segment elevationmyocardial infarction. Am J Cardiol . 2018;121:805 –
809.
18.Kusumoto FM, Calkins H, Boehmer J, et al. HRS/
ACC/AHA expert consensus statement on the use of
implantable cardioverter-de ﬁbrillator therapy in
patients who are not included or not wellrepresented in clinical trials. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2014;64:1143 –1177.
19.Komatsu Y, Hocini M, Nogami A, et al. Catheter
ablation of refractory ventricular ﬁbrillation storm af-
ter myocardial infarction.
Circulation . 2019;139:2315 –
2325 .
20.Kusumoto FM, Schoenfeld MH, Barrett C, et al.
2018 ACC/AHA/HRS guideline on the evaluation andmanagement of patients with bradycardia and cardiac
conduction delay: a report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force onClinical Practice Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm So-ciety. Circulation . 2019;140:e382 –e482 .
21.Olgin JE, Lee BK, Vittinghoff E, et al. Impact of
wearable cardioverter-de ﬁbrillator compliance on
outcomes in the VEST trial: as-treated and per-protocol analyses. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol .
2020;31:1009 –1018 .
22.Kim KH, Jeong MH, Ahn Y, et al. Differential clinical
implications of high-degree atrioventricular block
complicating ST-segment elevation myocardial
infarction according to the location of infarction in theera of primary percutaneous coronary intervention.Korean Circ J . 2016;46:315 –323.
23.Auffret V, Loirat A, Leurent G, et al. High-degree
atrioventricular block complicating ST segmentelevation myocardial infarction in the contemporaryera. Heart . 2016;102:40 –49.
24.Aguiar Rosa S, Timóteo AT, Ferreira L, et al.
Complete atrioventricular block in acute coronarysyndrome: prevalence, characterisation and implica-
tion on outcome. Eur Heart J Acute Cardiovasc Care .
2018;7:218 –223.
25.Gang UJ, Hvelplund A, Pedersen S, et al. High-
degree atrioventricular block complicating ST-
segment elevation myocardial infarction in the era ofprimary percutaneous coronary intervention. Europace .
2012;14:1639 –1645 .
26.Alnsasra H, Ben-Avraham B, Gottlieb S, et al. High-
grade atrioventricular block in patients with acutemyocardial infarction. Insights from a contemporarymulti-center survey. J Electrocardiol . 2018;51:386 –
391.
27.Singh SM, FitzGerald G, Yan AT, et al. High-grade
atrioventricular block in acute coronary syndromes:
insights from the Global Registry of Acute Coronary
Events. Eur Heart J . 2015;36:976 –983.
28.Pokorney SD, Radder C, Schulte PJ, et al. High-
degree atrioventricular block, asystole, and electro-mechanical dissociation complicating non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction. Am Heart J .
2016;171:25 –32.
29.Hynes JK, Holmes Jr DR, Harrison CE. Five-year
experience with temporary pacemaker therapy in thecoronary care unit. Mayo Clin Proc. 1983;58:122-126.
9.3. Pericarditis Management After MI
1.Gouriet F, Levy PY, Casalta JP, et al. Etiology of
pericarditis in a prospective cohort of 1162 cases. Am J
Med. 2015;128:784.e781 –784.e788 .
2.Imazio M, Brucato A, Rovere ME, et al. Contempo-
rary features, risk factors, and prognosis of the post-
pericardiotomy syndrome. Am J Cardiol . 2011;108:
1183 –1187.
3.Imazio M, Negro A, Belli R, et al. Frequency and
prognostic signi ﬁcance of pericarditis following acuteJACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2223

myocardial infarction treated by primary percutaneous
coronary intervention. Am J Cardiol . 2009;103:1525 –
1529 .
4.Berman J, Haffajee CI, Alpert JS. Therapy of symp-
tomatic pericarditis after myocardial infarction: retro-spective and prospective studies of aspirin,indomethacin, prednisone, and spontaneous resolu-
tion. Am Heart J . 1981;101:750 –753.
5.Imazio M, Bobbio M, Cecchi E, et al. Colchicine as
ﬁrst-choice therapy for recurrent pericarditis: results
of the CORE (COlchicine for REcurrent pericarditis)trial. Arch Intern Med . 2005;165:1987 –1991 .
6.Imazio M, Brucato A, Cemin R, et al. Colchicine for
recurrent pericarditis (CORP): a randomized trial. Ann
Intern Med . 2011;155:409 –414.
7.Imazio M, Belli R, Brucato A, et al. Ef ﬁcacy and
safety of colchicine for treatment of multiple re-currences of pericarditis (CORP-2): a multicentre,double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomised trial.Lancet . 2014;383:2232 –2237 .
8.Imazio M, Brucato A, Cemin R, et al. A randomized
trial of colchicine for acute pericarditis. N Engl J Med .
2013;369:1522 –1528 .
9.Imazio M, Bobbio M, Cecchi E, et al. Colchicine in
addition to conventional therapy for acute pericarditis:
results of the COlchicine for acute PEricarditis (COPE)
trial. Circulation . 2005;112:2012 –2016 .
10.Meurin P, Tabet JY, Thabut G, et al. Nonsteroidal
anti-in ﬂammatory drug treatment for postoperative
pericardial effusion: a multicenter randomized,double-blind trial. Ann Intern Med . 2010;152:137 –143.
11.Meurin P, Lelay-Kubas S, Pierre B, et al. Colchicine
for postoperative pericardial effusion: a multicentre,double-blind, randomised controlled trial. Heart .
2015;101:1711 –1716.
12.Bulkley BH, Roberts WC. Steroid therapy during
acute myocardial infarction. A cause of delayed healingand of ventricular aneurysm. Am J Med . 1974;56:244 –
250.
13.Silverman HS, Pfeifer MP. Relation between use of
anti-in ﬂammatory agents and left ventricular free wall
rupture during acute myocardial infarction. Am J Car-
diol. 1987;59:363 –
364.
9.4. Management of LV Thrombus After MI
1.Camaj A, Fuster V, Giustino G, et al. Left ventricular
thrombus following acute myocardial infarction: JACC
state-of-the-art review. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2022;79:
1010 –1022 .
2.Bulluck H, Chan MHH, Paradies V, et al. Incidence
and predictors of left ventricular thrombus by cardio-vascular magnetic resonance in acute ST-segmentelevation myocardial infarction treated by primarypercutaneous coronary intervention: a meta-analysis.J Cardiovasc Magn Reson . 2018;20:72 .
3.McCarthy CP, Vaduganathan M, McCarthy KJ, et al.
Left ventricular thrombus after acute myocardialinfarction: screening, prevention, and treatment. JAMA
Cardiol . 2018;3:642 –649.
4.Massussi M, Scotti A, Lip GYH, et al. Left ventricular
thrombosis: new perspectives on an old problem. Eur
Heart J Cardiovasc Pharmacother . 2021;7:158 –167.
5.Gellen B, Biere L, Logeart D, et al. Timing of cardiac
magnetic resonance imaging impacts on the detection
rate of left ventricular thrombus after myocardialinfarction. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging . 2017;10:1404 –
1405 .
6.Levine GN, McEvoy JW, Fang JC, et al. Management
of patients at risk for and with left ventricular
thrombus: a scienti ﬁc statement from the American
Heart Association. Circulation . 2022;146:e205 –e223 .
10.1. Cardiac Intensive Care Unit
1.Winkler C, Funk M, Schindler DM, et al. Arrhythmias in
patients with acute coronary syndrome in the ﬁrst 24
hours of hospitalization. Heart Lung . 2013;42:422 –427.
2.Wasfy JH, Kennedy KF, Masoudi FA, et al. Predicting
length of stay and the need for postacute care after acute
myocardial infarction to improve healthcare ef ﬁciency.
Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes . 2018;11:e004635 .
3.Fanaroff AC, Chen AY, Thomas LE, et al. Risk score
to predict need for intensive care in initially hemody-
namically stable adults with non-ST-segment-
elevation myocardial infarction. J Am Heart Assoc .
2018;7:e008894 .
10.2. Management of Anemia in ACS
1.Carson JL, Brooks MM, Hebert PC, et al. Restrictive
or liberal transfusion strategy in myocardial infarctionand anemia. N Engl J Med . 2023;389:2446 –2456 .
2.Vicente-Ibarra N, Marin F, Pernias-Escrig V, et al.
Impact of anemia as risk factor for major bleeding and
mortality in patients with acute coronary syndrome.
Eur J Intern Med . 2019;61:48 –53.
3.Younge JO, Nauta ST, Akkerhuis KM, et al. Effect of
anemia on short- and long-term outcome in patients
hospitalized for acute coronary syndromes. Am J Car-
diol. 2012;109:506 –510.
4.Brener SJ, Mehran R, Dangas GD, et al. Relation of
baseline hemoglobin levels and adverse events in pa-tients with acute coronary syndromes (from the Acute
Catheterization and Urgent Intervention Triage strat-
egY and Harmonizing Outcomes with RevasculariZa-tiON and Stents in Acute Myocardial Infarction Trials).Am J Cardiol . 2017;119:1710 –1716.
5.Chatterjee S, Wetterslev J, Sharma A, et al. Associ-
ation of blood transfusion with increased mortality in
myocardial infarction: a meta-analysis and diversity-adjusted study sequential analysis. JAMA Intern Med .
2013;173:132 –139.
6.Rao SV, Jollis JG, Harrington RA, et al. Relationship
of blood transfusion and clinical outcomes in patients
with acute coronary syndromes. JAMA . 2004;292:
1555 –1562 .
7.Alexander KP, Chen AY, Wang TY, et al. Transfusion
practice and outcomes in non-ST-segment elevation
acute coronary syndromes. Am Heart J . 2008;155:
1047 –1053 .
8.Yang X, Alexander KP, Chen AY, et al. The implica-
tions of blood transfusions for patients with non-ST-
segment elevation acute coronary syndromes: results
from the CRUSADE National Quality ImprovementInitiative. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2005;46:1490 –1495 .
9.Carson JL, Stanworth SJ, Dennis JA, et al. Transfusion
thresholds for guiding red blood cell transfusion.
Cochrane Database Sys Review . 2021;12:CD002042 .
10.Carson JL, Stanworth SJ, Guyatt G, et al. Red blood
cell transfusion: 2023 AABB international guidelines.JAMA . 2023;330:1892 –1902 .
11.Carson JL, Stanworth SJ, Alexander JH, et al.
Clinical trials evaluating red blood cell transfusionthresholds: an updated systematic review and with
additional focus on patients with cardiovascular dis-ease. Am Heart J . 2018;200:96 –101.
12.Ducrocq G, Gonzalez-Juanatey JR, Puymirat E,
et al. Effect of a restrictive vs liberal blood transfusionstrategy on major cardiovascular events among pa-
tients with acute myocardial infarction and anemia: the
REALITY randomized clinical trial. JAMA . 2021;325:
552–560.
13.Gonzalez-Juanatey JR, Lemesle G, Puymirat E,
et al. One-year major cardiovascular events after
restrictive versus liberal blood transfusion strategy inpatients with acute myocardial infarction and anemia:the REALITY randomized trial. Circulation . 2022;145:
486 –488.
10.3. Telemetry and Length of Stay
1.Piccini JP, White JA, Mehta RH, et al. Sustained
ventricular tachycardia and ventricular ﬁbrillation
complicating non-ST-segment-elevation acute coro-nary syndromes. Circulation . 2012;126:41 –49.
2.Rymer JA, Wegermann ZK, Wang TY, et al. Ven-
tricular arrhythmias after primary percutaneous coro-nary intervention for STEMI. JAMA Netw Open . 2024;7:
e2410288 .
3.De Luca G, Suryapranata H, van ’t Hof AW, et al.
Prognostic assessment of patients with acutemyocardial infarction treated with primary angio-
plasty: implications for early discharge. Circulation .
2004;109:2737 –2743 .
4.Wasfy JH, Kennedy KF, Masoudi FA, et al. Predicting
length of stay and the need for postacute care afteracute myocardial infarction to improve healthcare ef-ﬁciency. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes . 2018;11:
e004635 .
5.Jones DA, Rathod KS, Howard JP, et al. Safety and
feasibility of hospital discharge 2 days following pri-mary percutaneous intervention for ST-segment eleva-
tion myocardial infarction. Heart . 2012;98:1722 –1727.
6.Melberg T, Jorgensen M, Orn S, et al. Safety and
health status following early discharge in patients with
acute myocardial infarction treated with primary PCI: arandomized trial. Eur J Prev Cardiol . 2015;22:1427 –
1434 .
7.Grines CL, Marsalese DL, Brodie B, et al. Safety and
cost-effectiveness of early discharge after primaryangioplasty in low risk patients with acute myocardialinfarction. PAMI-II Investigators. Primary Angioplastyin Myocardial Infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol . 1998;31:
967 –972.
8.Seto AH, Shroff A, Abu-Fadel M, et al. Length of
stay following percutaneous coronary intervention: an
expert consensus document update from the societyfor cardiovascular angiography and interventions.Catheter Cardiovasc Interv . 2018;92:717 –731.
9.Hariri E, Kassas I, Hammoud MA, et al. Same day
discharge following non-elective PCI for non-STelevation acute coronary syndromes. Am Heart J .
2022;246:125 –135.
10.Pelter MM, Adams MG, Drew BJ. Transient
myocardial ischemia is an independent predictor ofadverse in-hospital outcomes in patients with acute
coronary syndromes treated in the telemetry unit.
Heart Lung . 2003;32:71 –78.
11.Rahimi K, Watzlawek S, Thiele H, et al. Incidence,
time course, and predictors of early malignantRao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372224

ventricular arrhythmias after non-ST-segment
elevation myocardial infarction in patients withearly invasive treatment. Eur Heart J . 2006;27:1706 –
1711.
12.Ottander P, Nilsson JB, Jensen SM, Naslund U.
Ischemic ST-segment episodes during the initial 24
hours of ST elevation myocardial infarction predict
prognosis at 1 and 5 years. J Electrocardiol . 2010;43:
224–229.
13.Falun N, Nordrehaug JE, Hoff PI, et al. Evaluation
of the appropriateness and outcome of in-hospitaltelemetry monitoring. Am J Cardiol . 2013;112:1219 –
1223 .
14.Sandau KE, Funk M, Auerbach A, et al. Update to
practice standards for electrocardiographic monitoringin hospital settings: a scienti ﬁc statement from the
American Heart Association. Circulation . 2017;136:
e273 –e344 .
10.4. Noninvasive Diagnostic Testing Prior to
Hospital Discharge
1.Daneault B, Généreux P, Kirtane AJ, et al. Compar-
ison of three-year outcomes after primary percuta-neous coronary intervention in patients with leftventricular ejection fraction <40% versus $40%
(from the HORIZONS-AMI trial). Am J Cardiol . 2013;111:
12–20.
2.Dokainish H, Rajaram M, Prabhakaran D, et al. In-
cremental value of left ventricular systolic and dia-stolic function to determine outcome in patients withacute ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction: theechocardiographic substudy of the OASIS-6 trial.Echocardiography . 2014;31:569 –578.
3.Ng VG, Lansky AJ, Meller S, et al. The prognostic
importance of left ventricular function in patients with
ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction: the
HORIZONS-AMI trial. Eur Heart J Acute Cardiovasc
Care. 2014;3:67 –77.
4.Damluji AA, van Diepen S, Katz JN, et al. Mechanical
complications of acute myocardial infarction: a scien-tiﬁc statement from the American Heart Association.
Circulation . 2021;144:e16 –e35.
5.McCarthy CP, Vaduganathan M, McCarthy KJ, et al.
Left ventricular thrombus after acute myocardialinfarction: screening, prevention, and treatment. JAMA
Cardiol . 2018;3:642 –649.
6.Ibanez B, Aletras AH, Arai AE, et al. Cardiac MRI
endpoints in myocardial infarction experimental andclinical trials: JACC Scienti ﬁc Expert Panel. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2019;74:238 –256
.
7.Pontone G, Guaricci AI, Andreini D, et al. Prognostic
strati ﬁcation of patients with ST-segment-elevation
myocardial infarction (PROSPECT): a cardiac magneticresonance study. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging . 2017;10:
e006428 .
8.Bulluck H, Dharmakumar R, Arai AE, et al. Cardio-
vascular magnetic resonance in acute ST-segment-
elevation myocardial infarction: recent advances,controversies, and future directions. Circulation .
2018;137:1949 –1964 .
9.Tamis-Holland JE, Jneid H, Reynolds HR, et al.
Contemporary diagnosis and management of patientswith myocardial infarction in the absence of obstruc-tive coronary artery disease: a scienti ﬁc statement
from the American Heart Association. Circulation .
2019;139:e891 –e908 .10.5.1. Patient Education
1.Kourbelis CM, Marin TS, Foote J, et al. Effectiveness
of discharge education strategies versus usual care onclinical outcomes in acute coronary syndrome patients:a systematic review. JBI Evid Synth . 2020;18:309 –331.
2.Feng YY, Chaves GSS, Shi W, et al. Education in-
terventions in Chinese cardiac patients on health be-haviours, disease-related knowledge, and health
outcomes: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Patient Educ Couns . 2021;104:1018 –1029 .
3.Shi W, Ghisi GLM, Zhang L, et al. Systematic review,
meta-analysis and meta-regression to determine theeffects of patient education on health behaviourchange in adults diagnosed with coronary heart dis-ease. J Clin Nurs . 2023;32:5300 –5327 .
4.Piekarz H, Langran C, Raza A, Donyai P. Medication-
taking for secondary prevention of acute myocardialinfarction: a thematic meta-synthesis of patient ex-
periences. Open Heart . 2022;9:e001939 .
5.American Heart Association. Life ’s Essential 8.
Accessed September 23, 2023. https://www.heart.org/
en/healthy-living/healthy-lifestyle/lifes-essential-8
10.5.2. Postdischarge Follow-Up and Systems of Care
Coordination
1.Dreyer RP, Dharmarajan K, Kennedy KF, et al. Sex
differences in 1-year all-cause rehospitalization in pa-tients after acute myocardial infarction: a prospectiveobservational study. Circulation . 2017;135:521 –531.
2.O’Brien C, Valsdottir L, Wasfy JH, et al. Comparison
of 30-day readmission rates after hospitalization for
acute myocardial infarction in men versus women. Am
J Cardiol . 2017;120:1070 –1076 .
3.Cholack G, Garfein J, Krallman R, et al. Predictors of
early (0-7 days) and late (8-30 days) readmission in acohort of acute coronary syndrome patients. Int J Med
Stud. 2022;10:38
–48.
4.Boulos PK, Messenger JC, Waldo SW. Readmission
after ACS: burden, epidemiology, and mitigation. Curr
Cardiol Rep . 2022;24:807 –815.
5.Oliveira L, Costa I, Silva DGD, et al. Readmission of
patients with acute coronary syndrome and de-
terminants. Arq Bras Cardiol . 2019;113:42 –49.
6.Gudnadottir GS, Gudnason T, Wilhelmson K, et al.
Multimorbidity and readmissions in older people with
acute coronary syndromes. Cardiology . 2022;147:121 –
132.
7.American College of Cardiology. Hospital to Home
Initiative: Quality Campaign. Accessed September 18,2023. https://cvquality.acc.org/initiatives/hospital-to-
home
8.American Heart Association. Acute Myocardial
Infarction Toolkit. Accessed September 16, 2023.
https://www.heart.org/en/health-topics/heart-attack/
heart-attack-tools-and-resources/acute-myocardial-infarction-toolkit
9.Bettger JP, Alexander KP, Dolor RJ, et al. Transi-
tional care after hospitalization for acute stroke ormyocardial infarction: a systematic review. Ann Intern
Med. 2012;157:407 –416.
10.Albert N, Gluckman TJ, McNamara R, et al. Ab-
stract 102: the association of patient navigator pro-gram features and hospital strategies with processes
and outcome metrics in acute myocardial infarction
and heart failure. 2019. Accessed September 23, 2023.https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/hcq.12.
suppl_1.102
11.Hoo JX, Yang YF, Tan JY, et al. Impact of multi-
component integrated care on mortality and hospi-
talization after acute coronary syndrome: a systematicreview and meta-analysis. Eur Heart J Qual Care Clin
Outcomes . 2023;9:258 –267.
12.Virani SS, Newby LK, Arnold SV, et al. 2023 AHA/
ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA guideline for the man-agement of patients with chronic coronary disease: areport of the American Heart Association/AmericanCollege of Cardiology Joint Committee on ClinicalPractice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2023;82:833 –
955.
10.5.3. Cardiac Rehabilitation
1.Dibben G, Faulkner J, Oldridge N, et al. Exercise-
based cardiac rehabilitation for coronary heart disease.Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2021;11:CD001800 .
2.Anderson L, Oldridge N, Thompson DR, et al. Exer-
cise-based cardiac rehabilitation for coronary heartdisease: Cochrane systematic review and meta-anal-ysis. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2016;67:1 –12.
3.Anderson L, Thompson DR, Oldridge N, et al. Exer-
cise-based cardiac rehabilitation for coronary heartdisease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2016;2016:
CD001800 .
4.Dibben GO, Faulkner J, Oldridge N, et al. Exercise-
based cardiac rehabilitation for coronary heart disease:a meta-analysis. Eur Heart J . 2023;44:452 –
469.
5.Snoek JA, Prescott EI, van der Velde AE, et al.
Effectiveness of home-based mobile guided cardiac
rehabilitation as alternative strategy for nonparticipa-tion in clinic-based cardiac rehabilitation amongelderly patients in Europe: a randomized clinical trial.JAMA Cardiol . 2021;6:463 –468.
6.Li Z, Hui Z, Zheng Y, et al. Ef ﬁcacy of phase II
remote home rehabilitation in patients with acutemyocardial infarction after percutaneous coronaryintervention. Contrast Media Mol Imaging . 2022;2022:
4634769 .
7.Campo G, Tonet E, Chiaranda G, et al. Exercise
intervention improves quality of life in older adultsafter myocardial infarction: randomised clinical trial.Heart . 2020;106:1658 –1664 .
8.Ritchey MD, Maresh S, McNeely J, et al. Tracking
cardiac rehabilitation participation and completion
among Medicare bene ﬁciaries to inform the efforts of a
national initiative. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes .
2020;13:e005902 .
9.Schultz WM, Kelli HM, Lisko JC, et al. Socioeco-
nomic status and cardiovascular outcomes: challenges
and interventions. Circulation . 2018;137:2166 –2178 .
10.Takura T, Ebata-Kogure N, Goto Y, et al. Cost-
effectiveness of cardiac rehabilitation in patients with
coronary artery disease: a meta-analysis. Cardiol Res
Pract . 2019;2019:1840894 .
11.McMahon SR, Ades PA, Thompson PD. The role of
cardiac rehabilitation in patients with heart disease.Trends Cardiovasc Med . 2017;27:420 –425.
12.Grace SL, Russell KL, Reid RD, et al. Effect of car-
diac rehabilitation referral strategies on utilizationrates: a prospective, controlled study. Arch Intern Med .
2011;171:235 –241.
13.Thomas RJ, Beatty AL, Beckie TM, et al. Home-
based cardiac rehabilitation: a scienti ﬁc statementJACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2225

from the American Association of Cardiovascular and
Pulmonary Rehabilitation, the American Heart Associ-ation, and the American College of Cardiology. Circu-
lation . 2019;140:e69 –e89.
14.Nkonde-Price C, Reynolds K, Najem M, et al.
Comparison of home-based vs center-based cardiacrehabilitation in hospitalization, medication adherence,and risk factor control among patients with cardio-vascular disease. JAMA Netw Open . 2022;5:e2228720 .
15.Huang K, Liu W, He D, et al. Telehealth in-
terventions versus center-based cardiac rehabilitationof coronary artery disease: a systematic review andmeta-analysis. Eur J Prev Cardiol . 2015;22:959 –971.
16.Zeng W, Stason WB, Fournier S, et al. Bene ﬁts and
costs of intensive lifestyle modi ﬁcation programs for
symptomatic coronary disease in Medicare bene ﬁ-
ciaries. Am Heart J . 2013;165:785 –792.
17.Freeman AM, Taub PR, Lo HC, Ornish D. Intensive
cardiac rehabilitation: an underutilized resource. Curr
Cardiol Rep . 2019;21:19 .
18.Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Inten-
sive Cardiac Rehabilitation (ICR) Programs. Accessed
October 10, 2024. https://www.cms.gov/medicare/
coverage/approved-facilities-trials-registries/cardiac-rehab-programs
19.Racette SB, Park LK, Rashdi ST, et al. Bene ﬁts of
theﬁrst Pritikin outpatient intensive cardiac rehabili-
tation program. J Cardiopulm Rehabil Prev . 2022;42:
449 –455.
20.Husaini M, Deych E, Waken RJ, et al. Intensive
versus traditional cardiac rehabilitation: mortality and
cardiovascular outcomes in a 2016 –2020 retrospective
Medicare cohort. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes .
2023;16:e010131 .
21.Dibben GO, Dalal HM, Taylor RS, et al. Cardiac
rehabilitation and physical activity: systematic review
and meta-analysis. Heart . 2018;104:1394 –1402 .
22.de Vries H, Kemps HM, van Engen-Verheul MM,
et al. Cardiac rehabilitation and survival in a largerepresentative community cohort of Dutch patients.Eur Heart J . 2015;36:1519 –1528 .
23.Williams MA, Maresh CM, Esterbrooks DJ, et al.
Early exercise training in patients older than age 65years compared with that in younger patients afteracute myocardial infarction or coronary artery bypassgrafting. Am J Cardiol . 1985;55:263 –266.
24.
Lavie CJ, Milani RV. Effects of cardiac rehabilita-
tion programs on exercise capacity, coronary risk fac-tors, behavioral characteristics, and quality of life in alarge elderly cohort. Am J Cardiol . 1995;76:177 –179.
25.Lavie CJ, Milani RV, Littman AB. Bene ﬁts of cardiac
rehabilitation and exercise training in secondary coro-nary prevention in the elderly. J Am Coll Cardiol .
1993;22:678 –683.
26.Stahle A, Mattsson E, Ryden L, et al. Improved
physical ﬁtness and quality of life following training of
elderly patients after acute coronary events. A 1 yearfollow-up randomized controlled study. Eur Heart J .
1999;20:1475 –1484 .
27.Beatty AL, Truong M, Schopfer DW, et al.
Geographic variation in cardiac rehabilitation partici-pation in Medicare and Veterans Affairs populations:opportunity for improvement. Circulation . 2018;137:
1899 –1908 .
28.Li S, Fonarow GC, Mukamal K, et al. Sex and racial
disparities in cardiac rehabilitation referral at hospitaldischarge and gaps in long-term mortality. J Am Heart
Assoc . 2018;7:e008088 .
29.McDonagh ST, Dalal H, Moore S, et al. Home-
based versus centre-based cardiac rehabilitation.Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2023;10:CD007130 .
30.Sandesara PB, Lambert CT, Gordon NF, et al. Car-
diac rehabilitation and risk reduction: time to “rebrand
and reinvigorate. ”J Am Coll Cardiol . 2015;65:389 –395.
11.1. DAPT Strategies in the First 12 Months
Postdischarge
1.Wallentin L, Becker RC, Budaj A, et al. Ticagrelor
versus clopidogrel in patients with acute coronarysyndromes. N Engl J Med . 2009;361:1045 –1057 .
2.Wiviott SD, Braunwald E, McCabe CH, et al. Prasu-
grel versus clopidogrel in patients with acute coronarysyndromes. N Engl J Med . 2007;357:2001 –2015 .
3.Yusuf S, Zhao F, Mehta SR, et al. Effects of clopi-
dogrel in addition to aspirin in patients with acute
coronary syndromes without ST-segment elevation.N Engl J Med . 2001;345:494 –502.
4.Fox KA, Mehta SR, Peters R, et al. Bene ﬁts and risks
of the combination of clopidogrel and aspirin in pa-tients undergoing surgical revascularization for non-ST-elevation acute coronary syndrome: the Clopidog-rel in Unstable angina to prevent Recurrent ischemic
Events (CURE) Trial. Circulation . 2004;110:1202 –1208 .
5.Held C, Asenblad N, Bassand JP, et al. Ticagrelor
versus clopidogrel in patients with acute coronary
syndromes undergoing coronary artery bypass surgery:results from the PLATO (Platelet Inhibition and PatientOutcomes) trial. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2011;57:672 –684.
6.Smith PK, Goodnough LT, Levy JH, et al. Mortality
beneﬁt with prasugrel in the TRITON-TIMI 38 coronary
artery bypass grafting cohort: risk-adjusted retro-spective data analysis. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2012;60:388 –
396.
7.Baber U, Dangas G, Angiolillo DJ, et al. Ticagrelor
alone vs. ticagrelor plus aspirin following percuta-
neous coronary intervention in patients with non-ST-segment elevation acute coronary syndromes: TWI-LIGHT-ACS. Eur Heart J . 2020;41:3533 –3545 .
8.Ge Z, Kan J, Gao X, et al. Ticagrelor alone versus
ticagrelor plus aspirin from month 1 to month 12 afterpercutaneous coronary intervention in patients withacute coronary syndromes (ULTIMATE-DAPT): a
randomised, placebo-controlled, double-blind clinical
trial. Lancet . 2024;403:1866 –1878 .
9.Hong SJ, Lee SJ, Suh Y, et al. Stopping aspirin within
1 month after stenting for ticagrelor monotherapy inacute coronary syndrome: the T-PASS randomizednoninferiority trial. Circulation . 2023;149:562 –573.
10.Kim BK, Hong SJ, Cho YH, et al. Effect of ticagrelor
monotherapy vs ticagrelor with aspirin on majorbleeding and cardiovascular events in patients with
acute coronary syndrome: the TICO randomized clinical
trial. JAMA . 2020;323:2407 –2416 .
11.Vranckx P, Valgimigli M, Odutayo A, et al. Ef ﬁcacy
and safety of ticagrelor monotherapy by clinical pre-sentation: pre-speci ﬁed analysis of the GLOBAL
LEADERS trial. J Am Heart Assoc . 2021;10:e015560 .
12.Ahn HJ, Lee SR, Choi EK, et al. Protective effect of
proton-pump inhibitor against gastrointestinalbleeding in patients receiving oral anticoagulants: asystematic review and meta-analysis. Br J Clin Phar-
macol . 2022;88:4676 –4687 .13.Bhatt DL, Cryer BL, Contant CF, et al. Clopidogrel
with or without omeprazole in coronary artery disease.N Engl J Med . 2010;363:1909 –1917.
14.Lai KC, Lam SK, Chu KM, et al. Lansoprazole for the
prevention of recurrences of ulcer complications fromlong-term low-dose aspirin use. N Engl J Med .
2002;346:2033 –2038 .
15.Moayyedi P, Eikelboom JW, Bosch J, et al. Pan-
toprazole to prevent gastroduodenal events in pa-tients receiving rivaroxaban and/or aspirin in arandomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.Gastroenterology . 2019;157:403 –412.e405 .
16.
Cayla G, Cuisset T, Silvain J, et al. Platelet function
monitoring to adjust antiplatelet therapy in elderlypatients stented for an acute coronary syndrome(ANTARCTIC): an open-label, blinded-endpoint, rand-
omised controlled superiority trial. Lancet . 2016;388:
2015 –2022 .
17.Claassens DMF, Vos GJA, Bergmeijer TO, et al.
A genotype-guided strategy for oral P2Y12 inhibitors inprimary PCI. N Engl J Med . 2019;381:1621 –1631.
18.Cuisset T, Deharo P, Quilici J, et al. Bene ﬁto f
switching dual antiplatelet therapy after acute coro-nary syndrome: the TOPIC (Timing of Platelet Inhibi-tion After Acute Coronary Syndrome) randomized
study. Eur Heart J . 2017;38:3070 –3078 .
19.Kim CJ, Park MW, Kim MC, et al. Unguided de-
escalation from ticagrelor to clopidogrel in stabilised
patients with acute myocardial infarction undergoingpercutaneous coronary intervention (TALOS-AMI): aninvestigator-initiated, open-label, multicentre, non-inferiority, randomised trial. Lancet . 2021;398:1305 –
1316.
20.Sibbing D, Aradi D, Jacobshagen C, et al. Guided
de-escalation of antiplatelet treatment in patients
with acute coronary syndrome undergoing percuta-
neous coronary intervention (TROPICAL-ACS): a rand-omised, open-label, multicentre trial. Lancet .
2017;390:1747 –1757.
21.Valgimigli M, Frigoli E, Heg D, et al. Dual anti-
platelet therapy after PCI in patients at high bleedingrisk. N Engl J Med . 2021;385:1643 –1655 .
22.Mehran R, Baber U, Steg PG, et al. Cessation of
dual antiplatelet treatment and cardiac events afterpercutaneous coronary intervention (PARIS): 2 year
results from a prospective observational study. Lancet .
2013;382:1714 –1722 .
23.Valgimigli M, Costa F, Lokhnygina Y, et al. Trade-
off of myocardial infarction vs. bleeding types onmortality after acute coronary syndrome: lessons from
the Thrombin Receptor Antagonist for Clinical Event
Reduction in Acute Coronary Syndrome (TRACER)randomized trial. Eur Heart J . 2017;38:804 –810.
24.Baber U, Mehran R, Giustino G, et al. Coronary
thrombosis and major bleeding after PCI with drug-eluting stents: risk scores from PARIS. J Am Coll Car-
diol. 2016;67:2224 –2234 .
25.Costa F, van Klaveren D, James S, et al. Derivation
and validation of the predicting bleeding complica-tions in patients undergoing stent implantation and
subsequent dual antiplatelet therapy (PRECISE-DAPT)
score: a pooled analysis of individual-patient datasetsfrom clinical trials. Lancet . 2017;389:1025 –1034 .
26.Urban P, Mehran R, Colleran R, et al. De ﬁning
high bleeding risk in patients undergoing percuta-neous coronary intervention. Circulation
. 2019;140:
240 –261.Rao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372226

27.Yeh RW, Secemsky EA, Kereiakes DJ, et al. Devel-
opment and validation of a prediction rule for bene ﬁt
and harm of dual antiplatelet therapy beyond 1 yearafter percutaneous coronary intervention. JAMA .
2016;315:1735 –1749 .
28.Hahn JY, Song YB, Oh JH, et al. Effect of
P2Y12 inhibitor monotherapy vs dual antiplatelettherapy on cardiovascular events in patients under-
going percutaneous coronary intervention: the
SMART-CHOICE randomized clinical trial. JAMA .
2019;321:2428 –2437 .
29.Watanabe H, Morimoto T, Natsuaki M, et al.
Comparison of clopidogrel monotherapy after 1 to 2
months of dual antiplatelet therapy with 12 months ofdual antiplatelet therapy in patients with acute coro-nary syndrome: the STOPDAPT-2 ACS randomizedclinical trial. JAMA Cardiol . 2022;7:407 –417.
30.Gurbel PA, Bliden KP, Hiatt BL, O ’Connor CM.
Clopidogrel for coronary stenting: response variability,drug resistance, and the effect of pretreatmentplatelet reactivity. Circulation . 2003;107:2908 –2913 .
31.De Luca G, Damen SA, Camaro C, et al. Final
results of the randomised evaluation of short-term dual antiplatelet therapy in patients with acutecoronary syndrome treated with a new-generationstent (REDUCE trial). EuroIntervention . 2019;15:
e990 –e998 .
32.Hahn JY, Song YB, Oh JH, et al. 6-month versus 12-
month or longer dual antiplatelet therapy afterpercutaneous coronary intervention in patients with
acute coronary syndrome (SMART-DATE): a rando-
mised, open-label, non-inferiority trial. Lancet .
2018;391:1274 –1284 .
33.Merlini PA, Bauer KA, Oltrona L, et al. Persistent
activation of coagulation mechanism in unstable
angina and myocardial infarction. Circulation . 1994;90:
61–68.
34.Yusuf S, Mehta SR, Zhao F, et al. Early and late
effects of clopidogrel in patients with acute coronary
syndromes. Circulation . 2003;107:966 –972.
35.Lawton JS, Tamis-Holland JE, Bangalore S, et al.
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI guideline for coronary artery
revascularization: a report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Commit-tee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2022;79:e21 –e129 .
36.Bittl JA, Baber U, Bradley SM, Wijeysundera DN.
Duration of dual antiplatelet therapy: a systematicreview for the 2016 ACC/AHA guideline focused up-date on duration of dual antiplatelet therapy in pa-tients with coronary artery disease: a report of theAmerican College of Cardiology/American Heart As-sociation Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines.
J Am Coll Cardiol . 2016;68:1116 –1139.
37.
Mauri L, Kereiakes DJ, Yeh RW, et al. Twelve or 30
months of dual antiplatelet therapy after drug-elutingstents. N Engl J Med . 2014;371:2155 –2166 .
38.O’Donoghue ML, Murphy SA, Sabatine MS. The
safety and ef ﬁcacy of aspirin discontinuation on a
background of a P2Y12 inhibitor in patients after
percutaneous coronary intervention: a systematic re-
view and meta-analysis. Circulation . 2020;142:538 –
545.
39.Baber U, Jang Y, Oliva A, et al. Safety and ef ﬁcacy
of ticagrelor monotherapy in patients with acute cor-
onary syndromes undergoing percutaneous coronaryintervention: an individual patient data meta-analysisof TWILIGHT and TICO randomized trials. Circulation .
2024;149:574 –584.
40.Valgimigli M, Gragnano F, Branca M, et al. P2Y12
inhibitor monotherapy or dual antiplatelet therapyafter coronary revascularisation: individual patientlevel meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials.
BMJ. 2021;373:n1332 .
41.Valgimigli M, Gragnano F, Branca M, et al. Tica-
grelor or clopidogrel monotherapy vs dual antiplatelettherapy after percutaneous coronary intervention: asystematic review and patient-level meta-analysis.JAMA Cardiol . 2024;9:437 –448.
42.Michelson AD, Frelinger AL 3rd, Braunwald E, et al.
Pharmacodynamic assessment of platelet inhibition byprasugrel vs. clopidogrel in the TRITON-TIMI 38 trial.Eur Heart J . 2009;30:1753 –1763 .
43.Palmerini T, Della Riva D, Benedetto U, et al.
Three, six, or twelve months of dual antiplatelet
therapy after DES implantation in patients with orwithout acute coronary syndromes: an individual pa-tient data pairwise and network meta-analysis of sixrandomized trials and 11 473 patients. Eur Heart J .
2017;38:1034 –1043 .
44.Natsuaki M, Watanabe H, Morimoto T, et al. An
aspirin-free versus dual antiplatelet strategy for cor-
onary stenting: STOPDAPT-3 randomized trial. Circu-
lation . 2024;149:585 –600.
45.Gilard M, Arnaud B, Cornily JC, et al. In ﬂuence of
omeprazole on the antiplatelet action of clopidogrelassociated with aspirin: the randomized, double-blindOCLA (Omeprazole CLopidogrel Aspirin) study. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2008;51:256 –260.
46.Sibbing D, Morath T, Stegherr J, et al. Impact
of proton pump inhibitors on the antiplatelet ef-fects of clopidogrel. Thromb Haemost .2 0 0 9 ; 1 0 1 :
714–719.
47.Gargiulo G, Costa F, Ariotti S, et al. Impact of
proton pump inhibitors on clinical outcomes in pa-tients treated with a 6- or 24-month dual-antiplatelettherapy duration: insights from the PROlonging Dual-
antiplatelet treatment after Grading stent-induced
Intimal hyperplasia studY trial. Am Heart J
. 2016;174:
95–102.
48.O’Donoghue ML, Braunwald E, Antman EM, et al.
Pharmacodynamic effect and clinical ef ﬁcacy of clo-
pidogrel and prasugrel with or without a proton-pumpinhibitor: an analysis of two randomised trials. Lancet .
2009;374:989 –997.
49.Goodman SG, Clare R, Pieper KS, et al. Association
of proton pump inhibitor use on cardiovascular out-
comes with clopidogrel and ticagrelor: insights from
the platelet inhibition and patient outcomes trial. Cir-
culation . 2012;125:978 –986.
50.Storey RF, Angiolillo DJ, Patil SB, et al. Inhibitory
effects of ticagrelor compared with clopidogrel onplatelet function in patients with acute coronary syn-dromes: the PLATO (PLATelet inhibition and patientOutcomes) PLATELET substudy. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2010;56:1456 –1462 .
51.Capodanno D, Mehran R, Krucoff MW, et al.
Deﬁning strategies of modulation of antiplatelet
therapy in patients with coronary artery disease: aconsensus document from the Academic ResearchConsortium. Circulation . 2023;147:1933 –1944 .
52.Mega JL, Close SL, Wiviott SD, et al. Cytochrome
p-450 polymorphisms and response to clopidogrel.N Engl J Med . 2009;360:354 –362.53.Galli M, Benenati S, Capodanno D, et al. Guided
versus standard antiplatelet therapy in patients un-dergoing percutaneous coronary intervention: a sys-tematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet . 2021;397:
1470 –1483 .
54.Tavenier AH, Mehran R, Chiarito M, et al. Guided
and unguided de-escalation from potent P2Y12 in-
hibitors among patients with acute coronary syn-drome: a meta-analysis. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc
Pharmacother . 2022;8:492 –502.
55.Bonaca MP, Bhatt DL, Cohen M, et al. Long-term
use of ticagrelor in patients with prior myocardialinfarction. N Engl J Med . 2015;372:1791 –1800 .
56.Smits PC, Frigoli E, Vranckx P, et al. Abbreviated
antiplatelet therapy after coronary stenting in patientswith myocardial infarction at high bleeding risk. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2022;80:1220 –1237 .
11.1.1. Antiplatelet Therapy in Patients on
Anticoagulation Postdischarge
1.Cannon CP, Bhatt DL, Oldgren J, et al. Dual antith-
rombotic therapy with dabigatran after PCI in atrialﬁbrillation. N Engl J Med . 2017;377:1513
–1524 .
2.Gibson CM, Mehran R, Bode C, et al. Prevention of
bleeding in patients with atrial ﬁbrillation undergoing
PCI. N Engl J Med . 2016;375:2423 –2434 .
3.Lopes RD, Heizer G, Aronson R, et al. Antith-
rombotic therapy after acute coronary syndrome orPCI in atrial ﬁbrillation. N Engl J Med . 2019;380:1509 –
1524 .
4.Vranckx P, Valgimigli M, Eckardt L, et al. Edoxaban-
based versus vitamin K antagonist-based antith-rombotic regimen after successful coronary stenting inpatients with atrial ﬁbrillation (ENTRUST-AF PCI): a
randomised, open-label, phase 3b trial. Lancet .
2019;394:1335 –1343 .
5.Dewilde WJ, Oirbans T, Verheugt FW, et al. Use
of clopidogrel with or without aspirin in patients
taking oral anticoagulant therapy and undergoing
percutaneous coronary intervention: an open-label,randomised, controlled trial. Lancet . 2013;381:1107 –
1115.
6.Lawton JS, Tamis-Holland JE, Bangalore S, et al.
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI guideline for coronary arteryrevascularization: a report of the American College ofCardiology/American Heart Association Joint Commit-
tee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2022;79:e21 –e129 .
7.Ruff CT, Giugliano RP, Braunwald E, et al. Compar-
ison of the ef ﬁcacy and safety of new oral anticoagu-
lants with warfarin in patients with atrial ﬁbrillation: a
meta-analysis of randomised trials. Lancet . 2014;383:
955–962.
8.Virani SS, Newby LK, Arnold SV, et al. 2023 AHA/
ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA guideline for the man-agement of patients with chronic coronary disease: a
report of the American Heart Association/American
College of Cardiology Joint Committee on ClinicalPractice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2023;82:833 –
955.
9.Gargiulo G, Goette A, Tijssen J, et al. Safety and
efﬁcacy outcomes of double vs. triple antithrombotic
therapy in patients with atrial ﬁbrillation following
percutaneous coronary intervention: a systematic re-view and meta-analysis of non-vitamin K antagonist
oral anticoagulant-based randomized clinical trials. Eur
Heart J . 2019;40:3757 –3767 .JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2227

10.Lopes RD, Hong H, Harskamp RE, et al. Optimal
antithrombotic regimens for patients with atrialﬁbrillation undergoing percutaneous coronary inter-
vention: an updated network meta-analysis. JAMA
Cardiology . 2020;5:582 –589.
11.Capodanno D, Di Maio M, Greco A, et al. Safety and
efﬁcacy of double antithrombotic therapy with non-
vitamin K antagonist oral anticoagulants in patientswith atrial ﬁbrillation undergoing percutaneous coro-
nary intervention: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. J Am Heart Assoc . 2020;9:e017212 .
12.Gargiulo G, Cannon CP, Gibson CM, et al. Safety
and ef ﬁcacy of double vs. triple antithrombotic ther-
apy in patients with atrial ﬁbrillation with or without
acute coronary syndrome undergoing percutaneous
coronary intervention: a collaborative meta-analysis of
non-vitamin K antagonist oral anticoagulant-basedrandomized clinical trials. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc
Pharmacother . 2021;7:F50 –F60.
13.Galli M, Andreotti F, Porto I, Crea F. Intracranial
haemorrhages vs. stent thromboses with direct oral
anticoagulant plus single antiplatelet agent or triple
antithrombotic therapy: a meta-analysis of random-ized trials in atrial ﬁbrillation and percutaneous coro-
nary intervention/acute coronary syndrome patients.Europace . 2020;22:538 –546.
14.Colleran R, Byrne RA, Ndrepepa G, et al.
Antithrombotic therapy with or without aspirin afterpercutaneous coronary intervention or acute coronarysyndrome in patients taking oral anticoagulation: ameta-analysis and network analysis of randomizedcontrolled trials. Cardiovasc Revasc Med . 2022;36:99 –
106.
15.Alexander JH, Wojdyla D, Vora AN, et al. Risk/
beneﬁt tradeoff of antithrombotic therapy in patients
with atrial ﬁbrillation early and late after an acute
coronary syndrome or percutaneous coronary inter-vention: insights from AUGUSTUS. Circulation .
2020;141:1618 –1627 .
16.Lopes RD, Leonardi S, Wojdyla DM, et al. Stent
thrombosis in patients with atrial ﬁbrillation under-
going coronary stenting in the AUGUSTUS trial. Cir-
culation . 2020;141:781 –783.
17.Smits PC, Frigoli E, Tijssen J, et al. Abbreviated
antiplatelet therapy in patients at high bleeding riskwith or without oral anticoagulant therapy after cor-onary stenting: an open-label, randomized, controlledtrial. Circulation . 2021;144:1196 –1211.
18.Valgimigli M, Frigoli E, Heg D, et al. Dual anti-
platelet therapy after PCI in patients at high bleedingrisk. N Engl J Med . 2021;385:1643
–1655 .
11.2. Reassessment of Lipid Levels Postdischarge
1.Benner JS, Tierce JC, Ballantyne CM, et al. Follow-
up lipid tests and physician visits are associated with
improved adherence to statin therapy. Pharmacoeco-
nomics . 2004;22(Suppl 3):13 –23.
2.Baigent C, Blackwell L, Emberson J, et al. Choles-
terol Treatment Trialists Collaboration. Ef ﬁcacy and
safety of more intensive lowering of LDL cholesterol: a
meta-analysis of data from 170,000 participants in 26randomised trials. Lancet . 2010;376:1670 –1681 .
3.Grundy SM, Stone NJ, Bailey AL, et al. 2018
AHA/ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/ADA/AGS/APhA/ASPC/NLA/PCNA guideline on the management of
blood cholesterol: a report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force onClinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;73:
e285 –e350 .
4.Ramsaran E, Preusse P, Sundaresan D, et al.
Adherence to blood cholesterol treatment guidelines
among physicians managing patients with atheroscle-rotic cardiovascular disease. Am J Cardiol . 2019;124:
169–175.
5.Zheutlin AR, Derington CG, Herrick JS, et al. Lipid-
lowering therapy use and intensi ﬁcation among United
States veterans following myocardial infarction orcoronary revascularization between 2015 and 2019.
Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes . 2022;15:e008861 .
6.Packard C, Chapman MJ, Sibartie M, et al. Intensive
low-density lipoprotein cholesterol lowering in car-
diovascular disease prevention: opportunities andchallenges. Heart . 2021;107:1369 –1375.
7.Wiviott SD, Cannon CP, Morrow DA, et al. Can low-
density lipoprotein be too low? The safety and ef ﬁcacy
of achieving very low low-density lipoprotein withintensive statin therapy: a PROVE IT-TIMI 22 substudy.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2005;46:1411 –1416 .
8.Giugliano RP, Wiviott SD, Blazing MA, et al. Long-
term safety and ef ﬁcacy of achieving very low levels of
low-density lipoprotein cholesterol: a prespeci ﬁed
analysis of the IMPROVE-IT trial. JAMA Cardiol . 2017;2:
547–555.
9.Giugliano RP, Keech A, Murphy SA, et al. Clinical
efﬁcacy and safety of evolocumab in high-risk patients
receiving a statin: secondary analysis of patients withlow LDL cholesterol levels and in those alreadyreceiving a maximal-potency statin in a randomized
clinical trial. JAMA Cardiol . 2017;2:1385 –
1391.
10.Cannon CP, Braunwald E, McCabe CH, et al.
Intensive versus moderate lipid lowering with statinsafter acute coronary syndromes. N Engl J Med .
2004;350:1495 –1504 .
11.Lowenstern AM, Li S, Navar AM, et al. Measure-
ment of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels inprimary and secondary prevention patients: insightsfrom the PALM Registry. J Am Heart Assoc . 2018;7:
e009251 .
12.Navar AM, Wang TY, Li S, et al. Lipid management
in contemporary community practice: results from theProvider Assessment of Lipid Management (PALM)Registry. Am Heart J . 2017;193:84 –92.
11.3. SGLT-2 Inhibitors and GLP-1 Receptor Agonists
1.Marso SP, Bain SC, Consoli A, et al. Semaglutide and
cardiovascular outcomes in patients with type 2 dia-
betes. N Engl J Med . 2016;375:1834 –1844 .
2.Marso SP, Daniels GH, Brown-Frandsen K, et al.
Liraglutide and cardiovascular outcomes in type 2diabetes. N Engl J Med . 2016;375:311 –322.
3.Neal B, Perkovic V, Mahaffey KW, et al. Canagli ﬂozin
and cardiovascular and renal events in type 2 diabetes.
N Engl J Med . 2017;377:644 –657.
4.Wiviott SD, Raz I, Bonaca MP, et al. Dapagli ﬂozin
and cardiovascular outcomes in type 2 diabetes. N Engl
J Med . 2019;380:347 –357.
5.Zinman B, Wanner C, Lachin JM, et al. Empagli ﬂozin,
cardiovascular outcomes, and mortality in type 2 dia-betes. N Engl J Med . 2015;373:2117 –2128 .
6.Gerstein HC, Sattar N, Rosenstock J, et al. Car-
diovascular and renal outcomes with efpeglenatide
in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med . 2021;385:896 –
907.7.McMurray JJV, Solomon SD, Inzucchi SE, et al.
Dapagli ﬂozin in patients with heart failure and reduced
ejection fraction. N Engl J Med . 2019;381:1995 –2008 .
8.Packer M, Anker SD, Butler J, et al. Cardiovascular
and renal outcomes with empagli ﬂozin in heart failure.
N Engl J Med
. 2020;383:1413 –1424 .
9.Petrie MC, Verma S, Docherty KF, et al. Effect of
dapagli ﬂozin on worsening heart failure and cardio-
vascular death in patients with heart failure with andwithout diabetes. JAMA . 2020;323:1353 –1368 .
10.Solomon SD, McMurray JJV, Claggett B, et al.
Dapagli ﬂozin in heart failure with mildly reduced or
preserved ejection fraction. N Engl J Med . 2022;387:
1089 –1098 .
11.Anker SD, Butler J, Filippatos G, et al. Empagli ﬂozin
in heart failure with a preserved ejection fraction.N Engl J Med . 2021;385:1451 –1461 .
12.Lincoff AM, Brown-Frandsen K, Colhoun HM, et al.
Semaglutide and cardiovascular outcomes in obesitywithout diabetes. N Engl J Med . 2023;389:2221 –2232 .
13.American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force
on Preoperative Fasting. Consensus Based Guidance onPreoperative Management of Patients (Adults andChildren) on Glucagon-like Peptide-1 (GLP-1) ReceptorAgonists. Accessed May 9, 2024. https://www.asahq.
org/about-asa/newsroom/news-releases/2023/06/american-society-of-anesthesiologists-consensus-based-
guidance-on-preoperative
14.U.S. Food and Drug Administration. FDA Revises
Labels of SGLT2 Inhibitors for Diabetes to IncludeWarnings About Too Much Acid in the Blood and
Serious Urinary Tract Infections. Accessed May 9,
2024. https://www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-safety-and-
availability/fda-revises-labels-sglt2-inhibitors-diabetes-include-warnings-about-too-much-acid-blood-and-serious
15.Thompson A, Fleischmann KE, Smilowitz NR, et al.
2024 AHA/ACC/ACS/ASNC/HRS/SCA/SCCT/SCMR/SVMguideline for perioperative cardiovascular manage-ment for noncardiac surgery: a report of the AmericanCollege of Cardiology/American Heart AssociationJoint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2024;84:1869 –1969 .
16.James S, Erlinge D, Storey RF, et al. Dapagli ﬂozin
in myocardial infarction without diabetes or heartfailure. NEJM Evid . 2024;3:EVIDoa2300286 .
17.Butler J, Jones WS, Udell JA, et al. Empagli ﬂozin
after acute myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med .
2024;390:1455 –1466 .
11.4. Use of Chronic Colchicine
1.Nidorf SM, Eikelboom JW, Budgeon CA, et al. Low-
dose colchicine for secondary prevention of cardio-vascular disease. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2013;61:404 –410.
2.Tardif JC, Kouz S, Waters DD, et al. Ef ﬁcacy and
safety of low-dose colchicine after myocardial infarc-
tion. N Engl J Med
. 2019;381:2497 –2505 .
3.Tong DC, Quinn S, Nasis A, et al. Colchicine in pa-
tients with acute coronary syndrome: the AustralianCOPS randomized clinical trial. Circulation . 2020;142:
1890 –1900 .
4.Nidorf SM, Fiolet ATL, Mosterd A, et al. Colchicine in
patients with chronic coronary disease. N Engl J Med .
2020;383:1838 –1847 .
5.Fiolet ATL, Opstal TSJ, Mosterd A, et al. Ef ﬁcacy
and safety of low-dose colchicine in patients withRao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372228

coronary disease: a systematic review and meta-
analysis of randomized trials. Eur Heart J .2 0 2 1 ; 4 2 :
2765 –2775 .
6.Cronstein BN, Molad Y, Reibman J, et al. Colchicine
alters the quantitative and qualitative display ofselectins on endothelial cells and neutrophils. J Clin
Invest . 1995;96:994 –1002 .
7.Nidorf M, Thompson PL. Effect of colchicine (0.5 mg
twice daily) on high-sensitivity C-reactive protein in-dependent of aspirin and atorvastatin in patients withstable coronary artery disease. Am J Cardiol . 2007;99:
805 –807.
8.Shah B, Allen N, Harchandani B, et al. Effect of
colchicine on platelet-platelet and platelet-leukocyteinteractions: a pilot study in healthy subjects. Inﬂam-
mation . 2016;39:182 –189.
9.Vaidya K, Arnott C, Martinez GJ, et al. Colchicine
therapy and plaque stabilization in patients with acutecoronary syndrome: a CT coronary angiography study.
JACC Cardiovasc Imaging . 2018;11:305 –316.
10.Crittenden DB, Lehmann RA, Schneck L, et al.
Colchicine use is associated with decreased prevalenceof myocardial infarction in patients with gout.J Rheumatol . 2012;39:1458 –1464 .
11.Solomon DH, Liu CC, Kuo IH, et al. Effects of
colchicine on risk of cardiovascular events and mor-tality among patients with gout: a cohort study usingelectronic medical records linked with Medicare claims.
Ann Rheum Dis . 2016;75:1674 –1679 .
12.Opstal TSJ, Fiolet ATL, van Broekhoven A, et al.
Colchicine in patients with chronic coronary disease inrelation to prior acute coronary syndrome. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2021;78:859 –866.
11.5. Immunization
1.Frobert O, Gotberg M, Erlinge D, et al. In ﬂuenza
vaccination after myocardial infarction: a randomized,
double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicenter trial.
Circulation . 2021;144:1476 –1484 .
2.Gurﬁnkel EP, Leon de la Fuente R, Mendiz O,
Mautner B. Flu vaccination in acute coronary syn-dromes and planned percutaneous coronary in-terventions (FLUVACS) study. Eur Heart J . 2004;25:
25–31.
3.Ciszewski A, Bilinska ZT, Brydak LB, et al.
Inﬂuenza vaccination in secondary prevention from
coronary ischaemic events in coronary artery dis-
ease: FLUCAD study. Eur Heart J
. 2008;29:1350 –
1358 .
4.Phrommintikul A, Kuanprasert S, Wongcharoen W,
et al. In ﬂuenza vaccination reduces cardiovascular
events in patients with acute coronary syndrome. Eur
Heart J . 2011;32:1730 –1735.
5.Madjid M, Miller CC, Zarubaev VV, et al. In ﬂuenza
epidemics and acute respiratory disease activity areassociated with a surge in autopsy-con ﬁrmed coro-
nary heart disease death: results from 8 years of
autopsies in 34,892 subjects. Eur Heart J . 2007;28:
1205 –1210 .
6.Warren-Gash C, Smeeth L, Hayward AC. In ﬂuenza as
a trigger for acute myocardial infarction or death fromcardiovascular disease: a systematic review. Lancet
Infect Dis . 2009;9:601 –610.7.Dvorakova A, Poledne R. In ﬂuenza: a trigger for
acute myocardial infarction. Atherosclerosis . 2004;172:
391.
8.Yedlapati SH, Khan SU, Talluri S, et al. Effects of
inﬂuenza vaccine on mortality and cardiovascular
outcomes in patients with cardiovascular disease: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. J Am Heart
Assoc . 2021;10:e019636 .
9.U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Recom-mended adult immunization schedule for ages 19 yearsor older. Accessed May 1, 2024. https://www.cdc.gov/
vaccines/schedules/downloads/adult/adult-combined-schedule.pdf
10.Gurﬁnkel EP, de la Fuente RL. Two-year follow-up
of the FLU Vaccination Acute Coronary Syndromes
(FLUVACS) Registry. Tex Heart Inst J . 2004;31:28 –32.
KEY WORDS ACC/AHA clinical practice
guideline, acute coronary syndrome(s), angina,unstable, anticoagulants, aspirin, atrialﬁbrillation, cardiovascular diseases, coronary
artery disease, coronary syndrome, emergency
medical services, EMS, ﬁbrinolytic agents,
hemorrhage, major adve rse cardiovascular
events, morphine, myocardial infarction, non –
ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction,percutaneous coronary intervention, prehospital,
revascularization, risk, ST-segment elevation
myocardial infarction, time factors, treatmentoutcomeJACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2229

Committee
Member Employment ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalPersonal
ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational,
or Other
Financial Bene ﬁtExpert
Witness
Sunil V. Rao,
ChairNew York University
Langone Health
System —Professor of
Medicine, Director of
Interventional
CardiologyNOT RELEVANT
nMedpaceNone None NOT RELEVANT
nNHLBI
nPHRINOT RELEVANT
nNHLBI *None
Michelle L.
O’Donoghue,
Vice ChairHarvard Medical
School —Associate
Professor, Department
of Medicine; Brigham
and Women ’s
Hospital —Associate
Physician, Senior
Investigator, TIMI
Study Group,
McGillycuddy Logue
Distinguished Chair in
Cardiovascular
MedicineNOT RELEVANT
nVerve
Therapeutics
RELEVANT
nAmgen
nNovartisNone None NOT RELEVANT
nAstraZeneca/ Med-
Immune (DSMB)
nJanssen Pharma-ceuticals (DSMB)
RELEVANT
nAmgen †
nAstraZeneca/
MedImmune †
nMerck †
nNovartis †None None
Marc Ruel,
Vice ChairUniversity of Ottawa
Heart Institute —
Professor, Division of
Cardiac Surgery and
Department of Cellular
and Molecular
MedicineRELEVANT
nEdwards
Lifesciences
nMedtronic
nXyloC orNone None RELEVANT
nArtivion ‡
nArtivion *
nAstraZeneca *
nCryoLife *
nMedtronic ‡
nMedtronic *
nPhaseBio *None None
John H. Alexander Duke University School
of Medicine —Professor
of Medicine, Division of
CardiologyNOT RELEVANT
nAkros
nAntev
nArtivion
nAtriCure
nCuris
nFerring
Pharmaceuticals
nHumacyte
nJanssenPharmaceuticals
nNovostia
nPortola †
nTeikoku Pharma
nVeralox
RELEVANT
nBayer
nBristol MyersSquibb
nPﬁzer†None None NOT RELEVANT
nAbbVie (DSMB)
nAtriCure (DSMB)
nEli Lilly/Duke Uni-
versity (DMC)
nFDA †
nFerring
Pharmaceuticals †
nGlaxoSmithKline
(DSMB)
nNIH ‡
nTheravance
(DSMB)
RELEVANT
nArtivion †
nBayer †
nBristol Myers
Squibb †
nCSL Behring †RELEVANT
nBoehringer
IngelheimNone
Usman Baber University of
Oklahoma Health
Sciences Center —
Associate Professor of
MedicineRELEVANT
nAbbott
nAmgen
nAstraZeneca
nBoston Scienti ﬁcNone None None RELEVANT
nAbiomed *
nIdorsia Pharma *NOT RELEVANT
nDefendant,
heart failureafter acute
MI, 2022
nDefendant,
injury after
PCI, 2022
Heather Baker,
Patient
RepresentativeDorothy Simon
Elementary School —
Principal; Aurora
University —Adjunct
ProfessorNone None None None NOT RELEVANT
nAHA SFRN ‡None
Continued on the next pageAPPENDIX 1. AUTHOR RELATIONSHIPS WITH INDUSTRY AND OTHER ENTITIES —2025 ACC/AHA/ACEP/NAEMSP/SCAI
GUIDELINE FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF PATIENTS WITH ACUTE CORONARY SYNDROMESRao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372230

Committee
Member Employment ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalPersonal
ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational,
or Other
Financial Bene ﬁtExpert
Witness
Mauricio G. Cohen Cleveland Clinic
Florida —Director,
Structural Heart
Interventions; Staff
Physician,
Interventional
Cardiology, Heart &
Vascular CenterRELEVANT
nBaylis/Boston
Scienti ﬁc
nCordisNone RELEVANT
nAccumed
Radial
Systems †RELEVANT
nAbbottNOT RELEVANT
nSCAI ‡
nAbbott *None
Mercedes Cruz-
Ruiz, Patient
RepresentativeHealthBridge4u —
Certiﬁed State
Community Health
Worker, InstructorNone None None None None None
Leslie L. Davis University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill —
Associate Professor,
PhD Division, School of
NursingNone None None NOT RELEVANT
nAANPNOT RELEVANT
nAANP
nACC
nElsevier
nNursing Clinics of
North America
nPCNA
nSigma Theta TauInternational HonorSociety
nSkin, Bones, Hearts& Private Parts
nThe Journal for
Nurse PractitionersNone
James A. de Lemos University of Texas
Southwestern Medical
Center —Professor of
Medicine, Chief of
CardiologyNOT RELEVANT
nLianBio †
RELEVANT
nCytokinetics †
nGlaxoSmithKline †None None NOT RELEVANT
nAmgen (DMC)
nAstraZeneca
(DSMB)
nBeckman Coulter
(Endpoint
Committee) †
nEli Lilly (DSMB) †
nJanssen Pharma-
ceuticals (DSMB) †
nMerck (DSMB)
nNovo Nordisk
(DSMB) †
nRegeneron (DSMB)
nSiemens (Endpoint
Committee) †
nVarian Medical
Systems (DSMB)
nVerve Therapeutics
(DSMB)
RELEVANT
nAbbott †
nRoche Diagnostics †None None
Tracy A. DeWald Duke Heart Center —
Clinical Pharmacist and
Assistant Consulting
Professor, Department
of MedicineNOT RELEVANT
nBodyportNone None NOT RELEVANT
nNHLBI (PI)NOT RELEVANT
nCytokinetics ‡
nNovartis (Co –PI)*None
Islam Y. Elgendy University of
Kentucky —Assistant
Professor of MedicineNone None None None None None
Dmitriy N.
FeldmanWeill Cornell Medical
College, New York
Presbyterian Hospital —
Professor of MedicineNone None None None RELEVANT
nMedtronic *None
Continued on the next pageAPPENDIX 1. CONTINUEDJACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2231

Committee
Member Employment ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalPersonal
ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational,
or Other
Financial Bene ﬁtExpert
Witness
Abhinav Goyal Emory University
School of Medicine —
Professor of Medicine
(Cardiology); Professor
of Epidemiology;
Emory Rollins School
of Public Health —Chief
Quality Of ﬁcer, Emory
Heart and Vascular
Center, Emory
HealthcareNone None None None None None
Ijeoma Isiadinso Emory University
School of Medicine —
Associate Professor of
Medicine; Director of
the Emory Center for
Heart Disease
PreventionNone None None None NOT RELEVANT
nAbbott (DSMB)
nAHA
nEli Lilly *
nNovartis *
nUniversity of
Florida *None
Venu Menon Cleveland Clinic Lerner
College of Medicine —
Professor of Medicine;
Mehdi Razavi Endowed
Educational Chair;
Director of the Cardiac
ICU; Director of the
Cardiovascular
FellowshipNone None None NOT RELEVANT
nEdwards
Lifesciences kNone None
David A. Morrow Harvard Medical
School —Professor of
Medicine; Brigham and
Women ’s Hospital —
Section Head, Critical
Care Cardiology,
Cardiovascular DivisionNOT RELEVANT
nInﬂammatix
RELEVANT
nAbbott †
nARCA Biopharma
nMerck †
nNovartis †
nRegeneron †
nRoche †None None NOT RELEVANT
nInCarda (DSMB)
nSoftcell †
RELEVANT
nAbbott †
nAbiomed †
nAmgen †
nAnthos
Therapeutics †
nARCA Biopharma †
nAstraZeneca †
nDaiichi Sankyo †
nEisai †
nGlaxoSmithKline †
nJohnson &
Johnson †
nMerck †
nNovartis †
nPﬁzer†
nRegeneron †
nRoche †
nSiemens †None None
Debabrata
MukherjeeTexas Tech University —
Professor and Chair,
Department of Internal
Medicine, Chief,
Cardiovascular
MedicineNOT RELEVANT
ACC †None None None NOT RELEVANT
NIH‡None
Continued on the next pageAPPENDIX 1. CONTINUEDRao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372232

Committee
Member Employment ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalPersonal
ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational,
or Other
Financial Bene ﬁtExpert
Witness
Elke Platz Brigham and Women ’s
Hospital —Assistant
Professor of Medicine,
Cardiovascular
Division; Harvard
Medical School —
Associate Professor of
Emergency MedicineNone None None None NOT RELEVANT
nAHA †
nCambridge Univer-
sity Press
nCVCT Future Clinical
Trialist fellowship
nEuropean Heart
Journal-Acute Car-
diovascular Care ‡
nEuropean Journal of
Heart Failure ‡
nNIH †
nWomen As One ‡
RELEVANT
nAstraZenecaNone
Susan B. Promes Pennsylvania State
University —Professor
and Chair, Department
of Emergency MedicineNone None NOT
RELEVANT
nROMTechNone NOT RELEVANT
nACEP
nMcGraw Hill †
nPenn State Univer-
sity Department ofEmergency
Medicine †
nSAEM †None
Tanveer Rab Emory University
School of Medicine —
Professor of Medicine,
Interventional
CardiologyNone None None None NOT RELEVANT
nABIM
nACC ‡
nMedtronic
nSCAINone
Sigrid Sandner Medical University of
Vienna —Associate
Professor of Cardiac
SurgeryNone None None None NOT RELEVANT
nAnnals of Thoracic
Surgery, Senior
Editor
nMarizyme, Inc.None
Yader Sandoval Minneapolis Heart
Institute, Abbott
Northwestern
Hospital —
Interventional
Cardiologist; Center
for Coronary Artery
Disease; Minneapolis
Heart Institute
Foundation —
InvestigatorRELEVANT
nAbbott †
nGE Healthcare
nPhilips †
nRoche †
nZollRELEVANT
nPhilips †
nRoche †NOT
RELEVANT
nPatent ‡NOT RELEVANT
nAHRQ (DSMB)
nIFCC Committee on
Clinical Applica-
tions of Cardiac
Bio-Markers ‡
nNHMRC (CEAC) ‡NOT RELEVANT
nJACC: AdvancesNone
Rachel Schunder § AHA/ACC —Science and
Health Advisor,
GuidelinesNone None None None NOT RELEVANT
nAHA/ACC salaried
employeeNone
Binita Shah New York University
Grossman School of
Medicine —Associate
Professor of Medicine;
VA New York Harbor
Healthcare System —
Interventional
CardiologistNOT RELEVANT
nHorizons
Therapeutics
nTerumo Medical
RELEVANT
nBoston Scienti ﬁc
nPhilips Volcano †None None NOT RELEVANT
nCRF (CEC)
nNovo Nordisk †
nThe Icahn School
of Medicine at
Mount Sinai (CEC)NOT RELEVANT
nAbiomed *
nAlleviant *
nCirculation:
Cardiovascular
Interventions †
nIdorsia *
nPHRI *
nSCAI ‡
nNHLBI
nVA Of ﬁce of
Research and
DevelopmentNone
Continued on the next pageAPPENDIX 1. CONTINUEDJACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2233

Committee
Member Employment ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalPersonal
ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational,
or Other
Financial Bene ﬁtExpert
Witness
Jason P. Stopyra Wake Forest School of
Medicine —Professor,
Department of
Emergency MedicineNOT RELEVANT
nCytovale
RELEVANT
nRocheNone None NOT RELEVANT
nAHRQ †
nComprehensive
Research Associ-
ates, LLC
nForest Devices
nHRSA †
nThe Duke
Endowment †
RELEVANT
nAbbott
nChiesi
nGenetesis
nPolymedcoNone NOT RELEVANT
nDefendant,
tendon injury,
2022
nPlaintiff, pul-
monary
embolus,
2022
nPlaintiff,
glaucoma,
2023
nDefendant,
spinal
compression,
2023
Amy W. Talbot § AHA/ACC —Science and
Health Advisor,
GuidelinesNone None None None NOT RELEVANT
nAHA/ACC salaried
employeeNone
Jacqueline E.
Tamis-HollandCleveland Clinic —
Interventional
Cardiologist and
Institute Director for
Acute Cardiac CareNOT RELEVANT
nGaffney Educa-
tional TrustNOT
RELEVANT
nEBIX ‡None NOT RELEVANT
nPHRI
nShockwave
Medical ‡NOT RELEVANT
nAHA ‡
nBronx Lebanon
Hospital ‡
nConcepts Medical *
nEncore Medical
Education
nNYS
nSCAI ‡
nSimply K EventsNone
Pam R. Taub University of California
at San Diego —
Professor of Medicine;
Director of Step Family
Foundation Cardiac
Rehabilitation and
Wellness CenterNOT RELEVANT
nJazz
Pharmaceuticals †
nLexicon
Pharmaceuticals
RELEVANT
nAmgen
nBayer †
nBoehringer
Ingelheim †
nCSL Behring
nEdwards
Lifesciences
nEli Lilly andCompany †
nEsperion †
nJanssen
Pharmaceuticals ‡
nMedtronic
nNovartis †
nNovo Nordisk †
nSanoﬁ-AventisNone NOT
RELEVANT
nEpirium
Bio†NOT RELEVANT
nArgenx †
nAtriCure †
nDexcom
nRegeneron †
RELEVANT
nMerck
nNovartis †NOT RELEVANT
nMilestone
PharmaceuticalsNone
Continued on the next pageAPPENDIX 1. CONTINUEDRao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372234

Committee
Member Employment ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalPersonal
ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational,
or Other
Financial Bene ﬁtExpert
Witness
Marlene S.
WilliamsJohns Hopkins Bayview
Medical Center —
Clinical Director of
Cardiology and
Associate Professor of
MedicineNOT RELEVANT
nHaemoneticsNone None None NOT RELEVANT
nZollNone
This table represents all relationships of committee members with industry and other entities that were reported by authors, including those not dee med to be relevant to this document, at the
time this document was under development. The table does not necessarily re ﬂect relationships with industry at the time of publication. A person is deemed to have a signi ﬁcant interest in a
business if the interest represents ownership of $5% of the voting stock or share of the business entity, or ownership of $$5,000 of the fair market value of the business entity; or if funds
received by the person from the business entity exceed 5% of the person ’s gross income for the previous year. Relationships that exist with no ﬁnancial bene ﬁt are also included for the purpose of
transparency. Relationships in this table are modest unless otherwise noted. Please refer to https://www.acc.org/guidelines/about-guidelines-and-clinical-documents/relationships-with-
industry-policy for de ﬁnitions of disclosure categories or additional information about the ACC/AHA Disclosure Policy for Writing Committees.
*This disclosure was entered under the Clinical Trial Enroller category in the ACC ’s disclosure system. To appear in this category, the author acknowledges that there is no direct or institutional
relationship with the trial sponsor as de ﬁned in the (ACCF or AHA/ACC) Disclosure Policy for Writing Committees.
†Signiﬁcant relationship.
‡Noﬁnancial bene ﬁt.
§Rachel Schunder and Amy Talbot are AHA/ACC joint staff members and acted as the Science and Health Advisors for the “2025 ACC/AHA/ACEP/NAEMSP/SCAI Guideline for the Management of
Patients With Acute Coronary Syndromes. ”No relevant relationships to report. Nonvoting author on recommendations and not included/counted in the RWI balance for this committee.
kThe Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services reported research funding from Edwards Lifesciences to Dr. Menon in 2023 for the ASCEND Study, Commence P ulmonary Study, and the ViV
Surveillance Study, which Dr. Menon disputes.
AANP indicates American Association of Nurse Practitioners; ABIM, American Board of Internal Medicine; ACC, American College of Cardiology; ACCF, American College of Cardiology Foun-
dation; ACEP, American College of Emergency Physicians; AHA, American Heart Association; AHRQ, Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; CEAC, C linical Events Adjudication Committee;
CEC, Clinical Events Committee; CRF, Cardiovascular Research Foundation; CVCT, CardioVascular Clinical Trialists; DMC, Data Monitoring Committ ee; DSMB, data and safety monitoring board;
HRSA, Health Resources and Services Administration; ICU, intensive care unit; IFCC, International Federation of Clinical Chemistry; JACC ,Journal of the American College of Cardiology ; MI,
myocardial infarction; NHLBI, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; NAEMSP, National Association of EMS Physicians; NHMRC, National Health a nd Medical Research Council; NIH, National
Institutes of Health; NYS, New York state; PCI, percutaneous coronary intervention; PCNA, Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association; PHRI, Po pulation Health Research Institute; PI, principal
investigator; SAEM, Society for Academic Emergency Medicine; SCAI, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions; SFRN, Strategical ly Focused Research Network; TIMI, Thrombolysis
in Myocardial Infarction; and VA, Veterans Affairs.APPENDIX 1. CONTINUEDJACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2235

Reviewer Representation Employment ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalPersonal
ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational,
or Other
Financial Bene ﬁtE x p e r t W i t n e s s
Hani Jneid
(Chair)Ofﬁcial
Reviewer —ACC/
AHA Joint
Committee on
Clinical Practice
GuidelinesUniversity of Texas Medical
Branch —John Sealy
Distinguished Centennial Chair in
Cardiology; Professor and Chief,
Division of Cardiovascular
Medicine; Medical Director,
Cardiovascular Service LineNone None None None None None
Bruce M. Lo Organizational
Reviewer —ACEPOld Dominion University —
Professor/Assistant Program
Director; Sentara Norfolk
General Hospital —Chief,
Department of Emergency
MedicineNone None None None nAAEMNone
Frederick Welt Organizational
Reviewer —SCAIUniversity of Utah —Director,
Cardiac Catheterization
LaboratorynFaradayPharmaceuticals
nXenter, Inc.None None None None nDefendant,
perforation
during an-
gioplasty and
stent place-
ment, 2024
nDefendant,
death related
to sponta-
neous bleed,
2024
nDefendant,
iatrogenic
dissection of
right coro-
nary artery,2024
Craig J. Beavers Content
ReviewerUniversity of Kentucky —
Assistant Adjunct ProfessorNone None None None None None
Theresa M.
BeckieContent
ReviewerUniversity of South Florida —
ProfessorNone None None None None None
James
BlankenshipContent
ReviewerUniversity of New Mexico —
Professor; University of New
Mexico Health Sciences —Director
of Cardiac Catheterization
LaboratoriesnAMA
nFDANone None None nZOLL
MedicalNone
Deborah
DiercksContent
ReviewerUT Southwestern Medical
Center —ProfessornCelecor †None None None nAbbott
Canada
nEmergencies
in Medicine
nQuidel Corp *
nSiemens
nTosoh
Biomedical *None
Clauden Louis Content
ReviewerWinter Haven Hospital —Clinical
Associate PhysicianNone None None None None None
Faisal M.
MerchantContent
ReviewerEmory University —Director of
Cardiac ElectrophysiologyNone None None None nHeart
Rhythm
SocietyNone
Continued on the next pageAPPENDIX 2. REVIEWER RELATIONSHIPS WITH INDUSTRY AND OTHER ENTITIES —2025 ACC/AHA/ACEP/NAEMSP/
SCAI GUIDELINE FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF PATIENTS WITH ACUTE CORONARY SYNDROMESRao et al JACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025
2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –22372236

Reviewer Representation Employment ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalPersonal
ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational,
or Other
Financial Bene ﬁtE x p e r t W i t n e s s
Noreen T. Nazir Content
ReviewerUniversity of Illinois at Chicago —
Assistant Professor of MedicineNone None None None None None
Derek So Content
ReviewerUniversity of Ottawa Heart
Institute —CardiologistNone None None None None None
Matthew
TomeyContent
ReviewerMount Sinai Fuster Heart
Hospital —Interventional/Critical
Care CardiologistNone None None None nMcGraw-Hill
Companies
nAHANone
This table represents all relationships of reviewers with industry and other entities that were reported at the time of peer review, including those n ot deemed to be relevant to this document, at
the time this document was under review. The table does not necessarily re ﬂect relationships with industry at the time of publication. A person is deemed to have a signi ﬁcant interest in a business
if the interest represents ownership of $5% of the voting stock or share of the business entity, or ownership of $$5,000 of the fair market value of the business entity; or if funds received by the
person from the business entity exceed 5% of the person ’s gross income for the previous year. Relationships that exist with no ﬁnancial bene ﬁt are also included for the purpose of transparency.
Relationships in this table are modest unless otherwise noted. Names are listed in alphabetical order within each category of review. Please refer to https://www.acc.org/guidelines/about-
guidelines-and-clinical-documents/relationships-with-industry-policy for de ﬁnitions of disclosure categories or additional information about the ACC/AHA Disclosure Policy for Writing
Committees.
*Signi ﬁcant relationship.
†Noﬁnancial bene ﬁt.
AAEM indicates American Academy of Emergency Medicine; ACC, American College of Cardiology; ACEP, American College of Emergency Physicians; AHA, A merican Heart Association; AMA,
American Medical Association; FDA, U.S. Food and Drug Administration; NAEMSP, National Association of EMS Physicians; SCAI, Society for Cardiovas cular Angiography and Interventions; and
UT, University of Texas.APPENDIX 2. CONTINUEDJACC VOL. 85, NO. 22, 2025 Rao et al
JUNE 10, 2025:2135 –2237 2025 Acute Coronary Syndromes Management Guideline2237