CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINE: FULL TEXT
2021 AHA/ACC/ASE/CHEST/SAEM/
SCCT/SCMR Guideline for the
Evaluation and Diagnosis of Chest Pain
A Report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association
Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines
Writing
Committee
Members *Martha Gulati, MD, MS, FACC, FAHA, Chair y
Phillip D. Levy, MD, MPH, FACC, FAHA, Vice Chair y
Debabrata Mukherjee, MD, MS, FACC, FAHA, Vice Chair y
Ezra Amsterdam, MD, FACC y
Deepak L. Bhatt, MD, MPH, FACC, FAHA y
Kim K. Birtcher, MS, P HARM D, AACC z
Ron Blankstein, MD, FACC, MSCCT x
Jack Boyd, MD y
Renee P. Bullock-Palmer, MD, FACC, FAHA, FASE, FSCCT y
Theresa Conejo, RN, BSN, FAHA k
Deborah B. Diercks, MD, MS C, FACC {
Federico Gentile, MD, FACC #
John P. Greenwood, MBC HB, P HD, FSCMR, FACC **
Erik P. Hess, MD, MS Cy
Steven M. Hollenberg, MD, FACC, FAHA, FCCP yy
Wael A. Jaber, MD, FACC, FASE zz
Hani Jneid, MD, FACC, FAHA xxJosé A. Joglar, MD, FAHA, FACC z
David A. Morrow, MD, MPH, FACC, FAHA y
Robert E. O ’Connor, MD, MPH, FAHA y
Michael A. Ross, MD, FACC y
Leslee J. Shaw, P HD, FACC, FAHA, MSCCT y
*Writing committee members are required to recuse themselves from
voting on sections to which their speci ﬁc relationships with industry may
apply; see Appendix 1 for detailed information.
yACC/AHA Representative.
zACC/AHA Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines Liaison.
xSociety of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography Representative.
kLay Patient Representative.
{Society for Academic Emergency Medicine Representative.
#Former ACC/AHA Joint Committee member; current member during the
writing effort.
**Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance Representative.
yyAmerican College of Chest Physicians Representative.
zzAmerican Society of Echocardiography Representative.
xxTask Force on Performance Measures, Liaison.
ISSN 0735-1097/$36.00 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2021.07.053This document was approved by the American College of Cardiology Clinical Policy Approval Committee in May 2021, the American Heart Association
Science Advisory and Coordinating Committee in May 2021, the Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography in July 2021, the Society for AcademicEmergency Medicine in June 2021, the Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance in June 2021, the American College of Chest Physicians in June2021, the American Society of Echocardiography in June 2021, the American Heart Association Executive Committee in July 2021, and the American
College of Cardiology Science and Quality Committee in July 2021.
The American College of Cardiology requests that this document be cited as follows: Gulati M, Levy PD, Mukherjee D, Amsterdam E, Bhatt DL, Birtcher
KK, Blankstein R, Boyd J, Bullock-Palmer RP, Conejo T, Diercks DB, Gentile F, Greenwood JP, Hess EP, Hollenberg SM, Jaber WA, Jneid H, Joglar JA,Morrow DA, O ’Connor RE, Ross MA, Shaw LJ. 2021 AHA/ACC/ASE/CHEST/SAEM/SCCT/SCMR guideline for the evaluation and diagnosis of chest pain: a
report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol.
78(22):e187-e285.
This article has been copublished in Circulation .
Copies: This document is available on the websites of the American College of Cardiology ( www.acc.org ) and the American Heart Association
(professional.heart.org ). For copies of this document, please contact the Elsevier Inc. Reprint Department via fax (212-633-3820) or e-mail ( reprints@
elsevier.com ).
Permissions: Multiple copies, modi ﬁcation, alteration, enhancement, and/or distribution of this document are not permitted without the express
permission of the American College of Cardiology. Requests may be completed online via the Elsevier site ( http://www.elsevier.com/about/policies/
author-agreement/obtaining-permission ).JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN COLLEGE OF CARDIOLOGY VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
ª2021 BY THE AMERICAN HEART ASSOCIATION, INC.,
AND THE AMERICAN COLLEGE OF CARDIOLOGY FOUNDATION.PUBLISHED BY ELSEVIER

ACC/AHA Joint
CommitteeMembersPatrick T. O ’Gara, MD, MACC, FAHA, Chair
Joshua A. Beckman, MD, MS, FAHA, FACC,Chair-ElectGlenn N. Levine, MD, FACC, FAHA, Immediate
Past Chair #
Sana M. Al-Khatib, MD, MHS, FACC, FAHA #
Anastasia L. Armbruster, PharmD, FACCKim K. Birtcher, MS, PharmD, AACC #
Ralph G. Brindis, MD, MPH, MACC #
Joaquin E. Cigarroa, MD, FACC #
Lisa de las Fuentes, MD, MS, FASE, FAHAAnita Deswal, MD, MPH, FACC, FAHADave L. Dixon, PharmD, FACC #
Lee A. Fleisher, MD, FACC, FAHA #
Federico Gentile, MD, FACC #
Zachary D. Goldberger, MD, MS, FACC, FAHA #
Bulent Gorenek, MD, FACCNorrisa Haynes, MDAdrian F. Hernandez, MD
Mark A. Hlatky, MD, FACC, FAHA #
John S. Ikonomidis, MD, PhD, FAHA #
José A. Joglar, MD, FAHA, FACCW. Schuyler Jones, MD, FACC
Joseph E. Marine, MD, FACC #
Daniel B. Mark, MD, MPH, FACCDebabrata Mukherjee, MD, MS, FACC, FAHALatha P. Palaniappan, MD, MS, FAHA, FACCMariann R. Piano, RN, PhD, FAHATanveer Rab, MD, FACCBarbara Riegel, PhD, RN, FAHA #
Erica S. Spatz, MD, MHS, FACC
Jacqueline E. Tamis-Holland, MD, FACC
Duminda N. Wijeysundera, MD, PhD #
Y. Joseph Woo, MD, FAHA, FACC
#Former ACC/AHA Joint Committee member; current member
during the writing effort.
ABSTRACT
AIM This clinical practice guideline for the evaluation and diagnosis of chest pain provides recommendations and algorithms for
clinicians to assess and diagnose chest pain in adult patients.
METHODS A comprehensive literature search was conducted from November 11, 2017, to May 1, 2020, encompassing randomized
and nonrandomized trials, observational studies, registries, reviews, and other evidence conducted on human subjects that were
published in English from PubMed, EMBASE, the Cochrane Collaboration, Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality reports, and
other relevant databases. Additional relevant studies, published through April 2021, were also considered.
STRUCTURE Chest pain is a frequent cause for emergency department visits in the United States. The “2021 AHA/ACC/ASE/CHEST/
SAEM/SCCT/SCMR Guideline for the Evaluation and Diagnosis of Chest Pain ”provides recommendations based on contemporary
evidence on the assessment and evaluation of chest pain. This guideline presents an evidence-based approach to risk strati ﬁcation
and the diagnostic workup for the evaluation of chest pain. Cost-value considerations in diagnostic testing have been incorporated,and shared decision-making with patients is recommended.
CONTENTS
ABSTRACT .................................... e188
TOP 10 TAKE-HOME MESSAGES FOR THE
EVALUATION AND DIAGNOSIS OF CHEST PAIN ...e190
PREAMBLE .................................... e190
1. INTRODUCTION ............................. e192
1.1. Methodology and Evidence Review .......... e192
1.2. Organization of the Writing Committee ....... e192
1.3. Document Review and Approval ............. e193
1.4. Scope of the Guideline ..................... e1931.4.1. Scope of the Problem ................. e195
1.4.2. De ﬁning Chest Pain .................. e195
1.5. Abbreviations ............................ e196
2.INITIAL EVALUATION ........................ e197
2.1. History .................................. e197
2.1.1. A Focus on the Uniqueness of Chest Pain
in Women .......................... e198
2.1.2. Considerations for Older Patients With
Chest Pain .......................... e199
2.1.3. Considerations for Diverse Patient
Populations With Chest Pain ........... e200
2.1.4. Patient-Centric Considerations ......... e200Gulati et al . JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
2021 Chest Pain Guideline NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285e188

2.2. Physical Examination ...................... e201
2.3. Diagnostic Testing ......................... e202
2.3.1. Setting Considerations ................ e202
2.3.2. Electrocardiogram ................... e203
2.3.3. Chest Radiography ................... e204
2.3.4. Biomarkers ......................... e205
3. CARDIAC TESTING GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS ..... e206
3.1. Anatomic Testing ......................... e207
3.1.1. Coronary Computed Tomography
Angiography ........................ e207
3.1.2. Invasive Coronary Angiography ......... e207
3.2. Diagnostic Testing ......................... e207
3.2.1. Exercise ECG ....................... e207
3.2.2. Echocardiography/Stress
Echocardiography .................... e208
3.2.3. Stress Nuclear (PET or SPECT) Myocardial
Perfusion Imaging ................... e209
3.2.4. Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance
Imaging ............................ e209
3.3. Cardiac Testing Considerations for Women
Who Are Pregnant, Postpartum, or ofChild-Bearing Age
......................... e210
4. CHOOSING THE RIGHT PATHWAY WITH PATIENT-
CENTRIC ALGORITHMS FOR ACUTE CHEST PAIN .... e210
4.1. Patients With Acute Chest Pain and Suspected ACS
(Not Including STEMI) ..................... e212
4.1.1. Low-Risk Patients With Acute Chest Pain .e215
4.1.1.1. Cost-Value Considerations in the
Evaluation of Low-Risk Patients .... e216
4.1.2. Intermediate-Risk Patients With Acute
Chest Pain .......................... e217
4.1.2.1. Intermediate-Risk Patients With Acute
Chest Pain and No Known CAD .... e217
4.1.2.1.1. Cost-Value Considerations e220
4.1.2.2. Intermediate-Risk Patients With Acute
Chest Pain and Known CAD ....... e220
4.1.3. High-Risk Patients With Acute Chest Pain .e222
4.1.4. Acute Chest Pain in Patients With Prior
Coronary Artery Bypass Graft (CABG)Surgery
............................ e223
4.1.5. Evaluation of Patients With Acute Chest
Pain Receiving Dialysis ............... e224
4.1.6. EvaluationofAcuteChestPaininPatientsWith
C o c a i n ea n dM e t h a m p h e t a m i n eU s e ...... e224
4.1.7. Shared Decision-Making in Patients With
Acute Chest Pain .................... e225
4.2. Evaluation of Acute Chest Pain With Nonischemic
Cardiac Pathologies ....................... e226
4.2.1. Acute Chest Pain With Suspected Acute
Aortic Syndrome .................... e2264.2.2. Acute Chest Pain With Suspected PE .... e227
4.2.3. Acute Chest Pain With Suspected
Myopericarditis ..................... e227
4.2.4. Acute Chest Pain With Valvular Heart
Disease (VHD) ...................... e228
4.3. Evaluation of Acute Chest Pain With Suspected
Noncardiac Causes ........................ e229
4.3.1. Evaluation of Acute Chest Pain With
Suspected Gastrointestinal Syndromes ...e231
4.3.2. Evaluation of Acute Chest Pain With
Suspected Anxiety and Other
Psychosomatic Considerations ......... e231
4.3.3. Evaluation of Acute Chest Pain in Patients
With Sickle Cell Disease ............... e232
5. EVALUATION OF PATIENTS WITH STABLE CHEST
PAIN ....................................... e232
5.1. Patients With No Known CAD Presenting With
Stable Chest Pain ......................... e232
5.1.1. Pretest Risk Probability to Guide Need for
Stress and Anatomic Tests ............. e233
5.1.2. Low-Risk Patients With Stable Chest Pain
and No Known CAD .................. e233
5.1.3. Intermediate-High Risk Patients With Stable
Chest Pain and No Known CAD ......... e235
5.2. Patients With Known CAD Presenting With Stable
Chest Pain ............................... e239
5.2.1. Patients With Obstructive CAD Who Present
With Stable Chest Pain ................ e239
5.2.1.1. Patients With Prior CABG Surgery
With Stable Chest Pain ........... e242
5.2.2. Patients With Known Nonobstructive CAD
Presenting With Stable Chest Pain ...... e243
5.2.3. Patients With Suspected Ischemia and
No Obstructive CAD (INOCA) ........... e244
5.3. Cost-Value Considerations in Diagnostic Testing ..e246
5.3.1. CCTA and CAC Scanning Cost-Value
Considerations ...................... e246
5.3.2. Exercise Electrocardiographic Cost-Value
Considerations ...................... e246
5.3.3. Stress Echocardiographic Cost-Value
Considerations ...................... e246
5.3.4. Stress Nuclear MPI Cost-Value
Considerations ...................... e246
5.3.5. Stress CMR Cost-Value Considerations ...e247
6. EVIDENCE GAPS AND FUTURE RESEARCH ..... e247
REFERENCES ................................. e249
APPENDIX 1
Author Relationships With Industry and Other Entities
(Relevant) ................................... e273JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021 Gulati et al .
NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285 2021 Chest Pain Guidelinee189

APPENDIX 2
Reviewer Relationships With Industry and Other
Entities (Comprehensive) ...................... e276
TOP 10 TAKE-HOME MESSAGES FOR THE
EVALUATION AND DIAGNOSIS OF CHEST PAIN
1.Chest Pain Means More Than Pain in the Chest. Pain,
pressure, tightness, or discomfort in the chest,
shoulders, arms, neck, back, upper abdomen, or jaw,as well as shortness of breath and fatigue should all beconsidered anginal equivalents.
2.High-Sensitivity Troponins Preferred. High-
sensitivity cardiac troponins are the preferred stan-dard for establishing a biomarker diagnosis of acutemyocardial infarction, allowing for more accurate
detection and exclusion of myocardial injury.
3.Early Care for Acute Symptoms. Patients with acute
chest pain or chest pain equivalent symptoms shouldseek medical care immediately by calling 9-1-1.Although most patients will not have a cardiac cause,
the evaluation of all patien ts should focus on the early
identi ﬁcation or exclusion of life-threatening causes.
4.Share the Decision-Making. Clinically stable patients
presenting with chest pain should be included in
decision-making; information about risk of adverseevents, radiation exposure, costs, and alternativeoptions should be provided to facilitate thediscussion.
5.Testing Not Needed Routinely for Low-Risk Patients.
For patients with acute or stable chest pain deter-mined to be low risk, urgent diagnostic testing for
suspected coronary artery disease is not needed.
6.Pathways. Clinical decision pathways for chest pain in
the emergency department and outpatient settings
should be used routinely.
7.Accompanying Symptoms. Chest pain is the dominant
a n dm o s tf r e q u e n ts y m p t o mf o rb o t hm e na n dw o m e nultimately diagnosed with acute coronary syndrome.Women may be more likely to present with accom-
panying symptoms such as nausea and shortness of
breath.
8.Identify Patients Most Likely to Bene ﬁtF r o mF u r t h e r
Testing. Patients with acute or stable chest pain who
are at intermediate risk or intermediate to high pre-test risk of obstructive coronary artery disease,respectively, will bene ﬁt the most from cardiac im-
aging and testing.
9.Noncardiac Is In. Atypical Is Out. “Noncardiac ”
should be used if heart disease is not suspected.“Atypical ”is a misleading descriptor of chest pain,
and its use is discouraged.
10.Structured Risk Assessment Should Be Used. For pa-
tients presenting with acute or stable chest pain, riskfor coronary artery disease and adverse events should
be estimated using evid ence-based diagnostic
protocols.
Figure 1 illustrates the take-home messages.
PREAMBLE
Since 1980, the American College of Cardiology (ACC) and
American Heart Association (AHA) have translated scien-tiﬁc evidence into clinical prac tice guidelines with rec-
ommendations to improve cardiovascular health. Theseguidelines, which are based on systematic methods toevaluate and classify evidence, provide a foundation forthe delivery of quality cardiovascular care. The ACC andAHA sponsor the development and publication of clinical
practice guidelines without commercial support, and
members volunteer their time to the writing and reviewefforts. Guidelines are of ﬁcial policy of the ACC and AHA.
For some guidelines, the ACC and AHA partner with otherorganizations.
Intended Use
Clinical practice guidelines provide recommendations
applicable to patients with or at risk of developing car-diovascular disease. The focus is on medical practice inthe United States, but these guidelines are relevant to
patients throughout the world. Although guidelines may
be used to inform regulatory or payer decisions, the intentis to improve quality of care and align with patients ’in-
terests. Guidelines are intended to de ﬁne practices
meeting the needs of patients in most, but not all, cir-cumstances and should not replace clinical judgment.
Clinical Implementation
Management, in accordance with guideline recommen-
dations, is effective only when followed by both prac-titioners and patients. Adherence to recommendations
can be enhanced by shared decision-making between
clinicians and patients, with patient engagement inselecting interventions on the basis of individualvalues, preferences, and associated conditions andcomorbidities.
Methodology and Modernization
The ACC/AHA Joint Committee on Clinical Practice
Guidelines (Joint Committee) continuously reviews, up-dates, and modi ﬁes guideline methodology on the basis of
published standards from organizations, including the
Institute of Medicine ( 1,2), and on the basis of internal
reevaluation. Similarly, pr esentation and delivery of
guidelines are reevaluated and modi ﬁed in response to
evolving technologies and o ther factors to optimally
facilitate dissemination of information to healthcareprofessionals at the point of care.Gulati et al . JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
2021 Chest Pain Guideline NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285e190

Numerous modi ﬁcations to the guidelines have
been implemented to make them shorter and enhance
“user friendliness. ”Guidelines are written and pre-
sented in a modular, “knowledge chunk ”format, in
which each chunk includes a table of recommenda-tions, a brief synopsis, recommendation-speci ﬁcs u p -
portive text and, when appropriate, ﬂow diagrams or
additional tables. Hyperlinked references are providedfor each modular knowledge chunk to facilitate quick
access and review.
In recognition of the importance of cost –value consid-
erations, in certain guidelines, when appropriate andfeasible, an analysis of value for a drug, device, or inter-vention may be performed in accordance with the ACC/AHA methodology ( 3).To ensure that guideline recommendations remain
current, new data will be reviewed on an ongoing basis by
the writing committee and staff. Going forward, targetedsections/knowledge chunks will be revised dynamically
after publication and timely peer review of potentiallypractice-changing science. The previous designations of“full revision ”and “focused update ”will be phased out.
For additional information and policies on guidelinedevelopment, readers may consult the ACC/AHA guide-
line methodology manual ( 4) and other methodology ar-
ticles ( 5-7). The Class of Recommendation (COR) indicates
the strength of recommendation, encompassing the esti-mated magnitude and certainty of bene ﬁt in proportion to
risk. The Level of Evidence (LOE) rates the quality ofscienti ﬁc evidence supporting the intervention on theFIGURE 1 Take-Home Messages for the Evaluation and Diagnosis of Chest Pain
JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021 Gulati et al .
NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285 2021 Chest Pain Guidelinee191

basis of the type, quantity, and consistency of data from
clinical trials and other sources ( Table 1 )(8).
Selection of Writing Committee Members
The Joint Committee strives to ensure that the guideline
writing committee contains requisite content expertiseand is representative of the broader cardiovascular com-
munity by selection of experts across a spectrum of
backgrounds, representing different geographic regions,sexes, races, ethnicities, intellectual perspectives/biases,and clinical practice settings. Organizations and profes-sional societies with related interests and expertise areinvited to participate as partners or collaborators.
Relationships With Industry and Other Entities
The ACC and AHA have rigorous policies and methods to
ensure that documents are developed without bias or
improper in ﬂuence. The complete policy on relationships
with industry and other entities (RWI) can be found online .
Appendix 1 of the guideline lists writing committee mem-
bers ’relevant RWI; for the purposes of full transparency,
their comprehensive disclosure information is available inthe Supplemental Appendix . Comprehensive disclosure
information for the Joint Committee is also available
online .
Evidence Review and Evidence Review Committees
In developing recommendati ons, the writing committee
uses evidence-based methodologies that are based on allavailable data ( 4,5). Literature searches focus on ran-
domized controlled trials (RCTs) but also include regis-tries, nonrandomized comparative and descriptivestudies, case series, cohort studies, systematic reviews,and expert opinions. Only key references are cited.
An independent evidence review committee is
commissioned when there are $1 questions deemed of
utmost clinical importance and merit formal systematicreview to determine which patients are most likely tobene ﬁt from a drug, device, or treatment strategy, and to
what degree. Criteria for commissioning an evidence re-view committee and formal systematic review includeabsence of a current authoritative systematic review,
feasibility of de ﬁning the bene ﬁt and risk in a time frame
consistent with the writing of a guideline, relevance to asubstantial number of patients, and likelihood that theﬁndings can be translated into actionable recommenda-
tions. Evidence review committee members may includemethodologists, epidemiologists, clinicians, and bio-statisticians. Recommendations developed by the writingcommittee on the basis of the systematic review are
marked “
SR.”
Guideline-Directed Management and Therapy
The term guideline-directed medical therapy (GDMT)
encompasses clinical evaluation, diagnostic testing, andboth pharmacological and procedural treatments. For
these and all recommended drug treatment regimens, thereader should con ﬁr md o s a g ew i t hp r o d u c ti n s e r tm a t e -
rial and evaluate for contrain dications and interactions.
Recommendations are limited to drugs, devices, and
treatments approved for clinical use in the United States.
Patrick T. O ’Gara, MD, MACC, FAHA
Chair, ACC/AHA Joint Committee on
Clinical Practice Guidelines
1. INTRODUCTION
1.1. Methodology and Evidence Review
The recommendations listed in this guideline are, when-
ever possible, evidence based. An initial extensive evi-dence review, which included literature derived fromresearch involving human subj ects, published in English,
and indexed in MEDLINE (thro ugh PubMed), EMBASE, the
Cochrane Library, the Agency for Healthcare Research andQuality, and other selected databases relevant to thisguideline, was conducted from November 11, 2017, to May1, 2020. Key search words included but were not limited tothe following: acute coronary syndrome, angina, angina
pectoris, aortic valve stenosis, biomarker, biomarkers, brainnatriuretic peptide, cardiac-gated single photon emission
computer-assisted tomography, cardiovascular magnetic
resonance, chest pain, CKMB, coronary angiography, coro-nary arteriosclerosis, coronary artery disease, creatinekinase, creatine kinase MB, echocardiography, electrocar-diography, heart valve diseas e, hypertrophic cardiomyop-
athy, magnetic resonance imaging, mitral valve stenosis,multidetector computed tomog raphy, myocardial infarc-
t i o n ,m y o c a r d i a li s c h e m i a ,m y o c a r d i u m ,N T - p r o B N P ,
perfusion imaging, positron-emission tomography, pulmo-
nary hypertension, stable angina, troponin I, troponin T,unstable angina, x-ray computed tomography . Additional
relevant studies, published through November 2020 dur-ing the guideline writing process, were also considered bythe writing committee and added to the evidence tableswhen appropriate. The ﬁnal evidence tables are included
in the Online Data Supplement and summarize the evi-
dence used by the writing committee to formulate rec-
ommendations. References selected and published inthe present document are representative and not all-inclusive.
1.2. Organization of the Writing Committee
The writing committee consisted of cardiac intensivists,
cardiac interventionalists, cardiac surgeons, cardiologists,
emergency physicians, epidemiologists, and a lay/patientrepresentative. The writing committee included repre-s e n t a t i v e sf r o mt h eA C C ,A H A ,A m e r i c a nS o c i e t yo fEchocardiography (ASE), American College of Chest Phy-sicians (CHEST), Society for Academic EmergencyGulati et al . JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
2021 Chest Pain Guideline NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285e192

Medicine (SAEM), Society of Cardiovascular Computed
Tomography (SCCT), and Society for CardiovascularMagnetic Resonance (SCMR). Appendix 1 lists writing
committee members ’relevant RWI. For the purposes of
full transparency, the writing committee members ’
comprehensive disclosure information is available in theSupplemental Appendix .
1.3. Document Review and Approval
This document was reviewed by 16 of ﬁcial reviewers
nominated by the ACC, the American College of EmergencyP h y s i c i a n s ,A H A ,A S E ,A m e r i c a nS o c i e t yo fN u c l e a rCardiology, CHEST, SAEM, SCCT, and SCMR, and 39 indi-
vidual content reviewers. Reviewers ’RWI information was
distributed to the writing committee and is published inthis document ( Appendix 2 ).
This document was approved for publication by the
governing bodies of the ACC and the AHA and wasendorsed by the ASE, CHEST, SAEM, SCCT, and SCMR.
1.4. Scope of the Guideline
The charge of the writing committee was to develop a
guideline for the evaluation of acute or stable chestpain or other anginal equivalents, in various clinicalTABLE 1Applying ACC/AHA Class of Recommendation and Level of Evidence to Clinical Strategies, Int erventions, Treatments, or
Diagnostic Testing in Patient Care (Updated May 2019)*
JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021 Gulati et al .
NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285 2021 Chest Pain Guidelinee193

settings, with an emphasis on the diagnosis on ischemic
causes. This guideline will not provide recommenda-tions on whether revascularization is appropriate orwhat modality is indicated. Such recommendations canbe found in the forthcoming ACC/AHA coronary artery
revascularization guideline. In developing the “2021
AHA/ACC/ASE/CHEST/SAEM/SCCT/SCMR Guideline forthe Evaluation and Diagnosis of Chest Pain, ”the writing
committee ﬁrst reviewed previous published guidelines
and related statements. Table 2 contains a list of
these publications deemed pertinent to this writingeffort and is intended for use as a resource, thus
obviating the need to repeat existing guideline
recommendations.
TABLE 2 Associated Guidelines and Statements
Title OrganizationPublication Year
(Reference)
GuidelinesStable ischemic heart disease ACC/AHA/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS 2014 ( 1)*
2012 ( 2)
Atrial ﬁbrillation AHA/ACC/HRS 2014 ( 3)*
2019 ( 4)
Non-ST elevation ACS AHA/ACC 2014 ( 5)
Blood cholesterol AHA/ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/ADA/AGS/APhA/
ASPC/NLA/PCNA2018 ( 6)
Heart failure ACC/AHA 2013 ( 7)*
2017 ( 8)
Primary prevention of cardiovascular disease ACC/AHA 2019 ( 9)
Management of overweight and obesity in adults AHA/ACC/TOS 2014 ( 10)
ST-elevation myocardial infarction ACC/AHA 2013 ( 11)
Ventricular arrhythmias and the prevention of sudden cardiac death AHA/ACC/HRS 2017 ( 12)
Coronary artery bypass graft surgery ACC/AHA 2011 ( 13)
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy ACC/AHA 2020 ( 14)
Percutaneous coronary intervention ACC/AHA/SCAI 2011 ( 15)*
2015 ( 16)
Secondary prevention and risk reduction therapy for patients with coronary and other
atherosclerotic vascular diseaseAHA/ACC 2011 ( 17)
Guidelines for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency cardiovascular care —part 9:
postcardiac arrest careAHA 2010 ( 18)*
2019 ( 19)
Prevention, detection, evaluation, and management of high blood pressure in adults ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/ASPC/
NMA/PCNA2017 ( 20)
Statements
Testing of low-risk patients presenting to the emergency department with chest pain AHA 2010 ( 21)
Prevention of cardiovascular disease in adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus AHA/ADA 2015 ( 22)
Prevention and control of seasonal in ﬂuenza with vaccines CDC 2018 ( 23)
*The full-text guideline and focused update references are provided.
AACVPR indicates American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation; AAPA, American Academy of Physician Assistants; AATS, Ame rican Association for Thoracic Surgery;
ABC, Association of Black Cardiologists; ACC, American College of Cardiology; ACPM, American College of Preventive Medicine; ADA, American Diabet es Association; AGS, American Geriatrics
Society; AHA, American Heart Association; APhA, American Pharmacists Association; ASH, American Society of Hypertension; ASPC, American Society for Preventive Cardiology; CDC, Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention; ESC, European Society of Cardiology; HRS, Heart Rhythm Society; NHLBI, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; N LA, National Lipid Association; NMA,
National Medical Association; PCNA, Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association; SCAI, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventi ons; STS, Society of Thoracic Surgeons; and TOS,
The Obesity Society.Gulati et al . JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
2021 Chest Pain Guideline NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285e194

1.4.1. Scope of the Problem
Synopsis
After injuries, chest pain is the second most common
reason for adults to present to the emergency department
(ED) in the United States and accounts for >6.5 million
visits, which is 4.7% of all ED visits ( 1). Chest pain also
leads to nearly 4 million outpatient visits annually in theUnited States ( 2). Chest pain remains a diagnostic chal-
lenge in the ED and outpatient setting and requiresthorough clinical evaluation. Although the cause of chestpain is often noncardiac, co ronary artery disease (CAD)
affects >18.2 million adults in the United States andremains the leading cause of death for men and women,
accounting for >365,000 deaths annually ( 3). Dis-
tinguishing between seriou s and benign causes of chest
pain is imperative .The lifetime prevalence of chest pain
in the United States is 20% to 40% ( 4), and women
experience this symptom more often than men ( 5). Of all
ED patients with chest pain, only 5.1% will have an acutecoronary syndrome (ACS), and more than half will ulti-mately be found to have a noncardiac cause ( 6). None-
theless, chest pain is the most common symptom of CADi nb o t hm e na n dw o m e n .
1.4.2. De ﬁning Chest Pain
Recommendations for De ﬁning Chest Pain
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplements 1 and 2 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. An initial assessment of chest pain is recommende d to triage patients effectively on the basis of the
likelihood that symptoms may be attributable to myocardial ischemia ( 1-7).
1 C-LD2. Chest pain should not be described as atypical, beca use it is not helpful in determining the cause and can
be misinterpreted as benign in nature. Instead, chest pain should be described as cardiac, possibly
cardiac, or noncardiac becaus e these terms are more speci ﬁc to the potential underlying diagnosis.
Synopsis
Chest pain is one of the most common reasons that
people seek medical care. The term “chest pain ”is used by
patients and applied by clinicians to describe the manyunpleasant or uncomfortable sensations in the anteriorchest that prompt concern for a cardiac problem. Chest
pain should be considered acute when it is new onset
or involves a change in pattern, intensity, or durationcompared with previous episodes in a patient withrecurrent symptoms. Chest pain should be consideredstable when symptoms are chroni c and associated with
consistent precipitants such as exertion or emotionalstress.
Although the term chest pain is used in clinical practice,
patients often report pressure, tightness, squeezing,
heaviness, or burning. In this regard, a more appropriateterm is “chest discomfort, ”because patients may not use
the descriptor “pain. ”They may also report a location
other than the chest, including the shoulder, arm, neck,back, upper abdomen, or jaw. Despite individual vari-ability, the discomfort induced by myocardial ischemia isoften characteristic and theref ore central to the diagnosis.
For this reason, features more likely to be associated with
ischemia have been described as typical versus atypical;however, the latter can be confusing because it isfrequently used to describe symptoms considerednonischemic as well as noncardiac. Although othernonclassic symptoms of ischemia, such as shortness of
breath, nausea, radiating discomfort, or numbness, maybe present, chest pain or chest discomfort remains thepredominant symptom reported in men and women whoare ultimately diagnosed with myocardial ischemia ( 3-7).
Pain —described as sharp, ﬂeeting, related to inspiration
(pleuritic) or position, or shifting locations —suggests a
lower likelihood of ischemia.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁcS u p p o r t i v eT e x t
1. Like most visceral discomfort, the sensation produced
by myocardial ischemia is characteristically deep,difﬁcult to localize, and usually diffuse. Point tender-
ness renders ischemia less likely. Reported symptoms
lie somewhere on a continuum of higher or lower
probability of ischemia based on the presence orabsence of speci ﬁcc h a r a c t e r i s t i c s( Figure 2 ). Other
clinical elements (e.g., duration, provoking andrelieving factors, patient ag e, cardiac risk factors) pro-
vide further focus toward or away from ischemia in thediagnostic process. It is essential to ascertain the char-acteristics of the chest pain d irectly from the patient for
optimal interpretation ( 1-7).Ap a t i e n t ’s history is the
most important basis for considering presence orabsence of myocardial ischemia, but the source of car-diac symptoms is complex, a nd their expression is
variable. The diagnosis of ischemia may require dataJACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021 Gulati et al .
NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285 2021 Chest Pain Guidelinee195

beyond history alone. In some patients, what appears
to be noncardiac chest pain may be ischemic in origin.
2. Chest pain has been traditionally strati ﬁed into
“typical ”and “atypical ”t y p e s .C h e s tp a i nt h a ti sm o r e
likely associated with ischemia consists of substernal
chest discomfort provoked by exertion or emotional
stress and relieved by rest or nitroglycerin. The moreclassic the chest discomfort is based on quality, loca-tion, radiation, and provoking and relieving factors, themore likely it is to be of cardiac ischemic origin. Atyp-ical chest pain is a problematic term. Although it wasintended to indicate angina without typical chestsymptoms, it is more often used to state that the
symptom is noncardiac in origin. As such, we
discourage the use of atypical chest pain. Emphasis ismore constructively placed on speci ﬁca s p e c t so f
symptoms that suggest their o r i g i ni nt e r m so fp r o b a b l e
ischemia. Of note, chest pain is broadly de ﬁned to also
include referred pain in the shoulders, arms, jaw, neck,
and upper abdomen. To diminish ambiguity, use “car-
diac, ”“possible cardiac, ”and “noncardiac ”to describe
the suspected cause of chest pain is encouraged.
1.5. AbbreviationsFIGURE 2 Index of Suspicion That Chest “Pain ”Is Ischemic in Origin on the Basis of Commonly Used Descriptors
Abbreviation Meaning/Phrase
ACS acute coronary syndrome
AMI acute myocardial infarctionCABG coronary artery bypass graftCAC coronary artery calciumCAD coronary artery disease
CCTA coronary computed tomographic angiography
Continued in the next columnAbbreviation Meaning/Phrase
CDP clinical decision pathway
CMR cardiovascular magnetic resonance
cTn cardiac troponinECG electrocardiogramED emergency departmentEMS emergency medical services
FFR-CT fractional ﬂow reserve with computed tomography
GDMT guideline-directed medical therapyhs-cTn high-sensitivity cardiac troponinICA invasive coronary angiographyINOCA ischemia and no obstructive coronary artery disease
MACE major adverse cardiovascular events
MBFR myocardial blood ﬂow reserve
METs metabolic equivalentsMINOCA myocardial infarction and nonobstructive coronary arteriesMPI myocardial perfusion imagingNSTE-ACS non –ST-segment –elevation acute coronary syndrome
PCI percutaneous coronary intervention
PE pulmonary embolismPET positron emission tomographySIHD stable ischemic heart diseaseSPECT single-photon emission computed tomography
STEMI ST-segment –elevation myocardial infarction
TEE transesophageal echocardiographyTTE transthoracic echocardiographyVF ventricular ﬁbrillation
VHD valvular heart diseaseVT ventricular tachycardiaGulati et al . JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
2021 Chest Pain Guideline NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285e196

2. INITIAL EVALUATION
2.1. History
Synopsis
Chest pain or chest pain equivalent will be referred to
in these guidelines as “chest pain. ”Patients presenting to
the ED with nontraumatic chest pain are a frequentdiagnostic challenge ( 1). The priorities are: 1) rapid initi-
ation of optimal management in patients with life-
threatening conditions such as ACS, aortic dissection,and pulmonary embolism (PE), as well as nonvasculars y n d r o m e s( e . g . ,e s o p h a g e a lr u p t u r e ,t e n s i o np n e u m o -thorax); and 2) deliberate therapy for those with lesscritical illness. Although there a re several life-threatening
causes, chest pain usually re ﬂects a more benign condi-
tion ( Figure 3 )(2-4). The initial ECG is important to the
evaluation, but history, examination, biomarkers, and
other aids remain essential. There is frequently a lack ofcorrelation between intensity of symptoms andseriousness of disease and general similarity of symptoms
among different causes of chest pain. A comprehensivehistory that captures all the characteristics of chest pain(Table 3 ), including but not limited to its: 1) nature; 2)
onset and duration; 3) location and radiation; 4) precipi-
tating factors; 5) relieving factors; and 6) associated
symptoms can help better identify potential cardiac cau-ses and should be obtained from all patients.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁcS u p p o r t i v eT e x t
1. Angina pectoris is perceived as a retrosternal chest
discomfort that builds gradually in intensity (over
several minutes), is usually precipitated by stress
(physical or emotional) or occurring at rest (as in thecase of an ACS) with characteristic radiation (e.g., leftRecommendation for History
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
1 C-LD1. In patients with chest pain, a focused history that i ncludes characteristics and duration of symptoms
relative to presentation as well as associated featur es, and cardiovascular risk factor assessment should
be obtained.
FIGURE 3 Top 10 Causes of Chest Pain in the ED Based on Age (Weighted Percentage)
Created using data from Hsia RY, et al. ( 3). ED indicates emergency department.JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021 Gulati et al .
NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285 2021 Chest Pain Guidelinee197

arm, neck, jaw) and its associated symptoms (e.g.,
dyspnea, nausea, lightheadedness). When activelytreated or spontaneously resolving, it dissipates over afew minutes. Relief with nitroglycerin is not neces-sarily diagnostic of myocardial ischemia and should not
be used as a diagnostic crite rion, especially because
other entities demonstrate comparable response (e.g.,esophageal spasm) ( 1,5). Associated symptoms such as
shortness of breath, nausea or vomiting,lightheadedness, confusion, presyncope or syncope, or
vague abdominal symptoms are more frequent amongpatients with diabetes, w omen, and the elderly. A
detailed assessment of cardiovascular risk factors, re-view of systems, past medical history, and family and
social history should complement the assessment of
presenting symptoms.
2.1.1. A Focus on the Uniqueness of Chest Pain in WomenTABLE 3 Chest Pain Characteristics and Corresponding Causes
Nature
Anginal symptoms are perceived as retrosternal chest discomfort (e.g., pain, discomfort, heaviness, tightness, pressure, constriction, squeezi ng) ( Section 1.4.2 ,
Deﬁning Chest Pain).
Sharp chest pain that increases with inspiration and lying supine is unlikely related to ischemic heart disease (e.g., these symptoms usually occur w ith acute
pericarditis).
Onset and duration
Anginal symptoms gradually build in intensity over a few minutes.Sudden onset of ripping chest pain (with radiation to the upper or lower back) is unlikely to be anginal and is suspicious of an acute aortic syndrome.
Fleeting chest pain —of few seconds ’duration —is unlikely to be related to ischemic heart disease.
Location and radiation
Pain that can be localized to a very limited area and pain radiating to below the umbilicus or hip are unlikely related to myocardial ischemia.
Severity
Ripping chest pain ( “worse chest pain of my life ”), especially when sudden in onset and occurring in a hypertensive patient, or with a known bicuspid aortic valve or
aortic dilation, is suspicious of an acute aortic syndrome (e.g., aortic dissection).
Precipitating factors
Physical exercise or emotional stress are common triggers of anginal symptoms.Occurrence at rest or with minimal exertion associated with anginal symptoms usually indicates ACS.
Positional chest pain is usually nonischemic (e.g., musculoskeletal).
Relieving factors
Relief with nitroglycerin is not necessarily diagnostic of myocardial ischemia and should not be used as a diagnostic criterion.
Associated symptoms
Common symptoms associated with myocardial ischemia include, but are not limited to, dyspnea, palpitations, diaphoresis, lightheadedness, presy ncope or syncope,
upper abdominal pain, or heartburn unrelated to meals and nausea or vomiting.
Symptoms on the left or right side of the chest, stabbing, sharp pain, or discomfort in the throat or abdomen may occur in patients with diabetes, women, and elderly
patients.
ACS indicates acute coronary syndrome.
Recommendations for a Focus on the Uniqueness of Chest Pain in Women
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplements 3 and 4 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. Women who present with chest pain are at risk for un derdiagnosis, and potential cardiac causes should
always be considered ( 1-7).
1 B-NR2. In women presenting with chest pain, it is recommended to obtain a history that emphasizes accompa-
nying symptoms that are more common in women with ACS ( 1-7).Gulati et al . JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
2021 Chest Pain Guideline NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285e198

Synopsis
Most patients who present to the ED with chest pain are
women, particularly among those $65 years of age ( 8).
The ISCHEMIA (Internatio nal Study of Comparative
Health Effectiveness With Medical and Invasive Ap-
proaches) trial demonstrated that women with moderate-
to-severe ischemia are more symptomatic than men ( 9).
Women are less likely to have timely and appropriate care(10). This could be explained by the fact that women are
more likely to experience prodromal symptoms whenthey seek medical care ( 11). Women may also present with
accompanying symptoms (e.g., nausea, fatigue, andshortness of breath) more often than men ( 12-14 ). How-
ever, chest pain remains the predominant symptom
reported by women among those ultimately diagnosedwith ACS, occurring with a frequency equal to men(3,5-7,15,16).
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Traditional risk score tools and physician assessments
often underestimate risk in women and misclassifythem as having nonischemic chest pain ( 1,2). The
PROMISE (Prospective Multicenter Imaging Study forEvaluation of Chest Pain) trial looked at sex differencesin the presentation, risk factors, demographics,noninvasive test referrals, and results of 10,003 stable
outpatients with suspected CAD ( 1). Women commonly
presented with chest pain symptoms similar to men butalso had a greater prevalence of other symptoms suchas palpitations, jaw and neck pain, as well as back pain.Women also had more cardio vascular risk factors,
including hypertension (66.6% versus 63.2%; p <0.001),
hyperlipidemia (68.9% versus 66.3%; p ¼0.004), older
age (62.4 /C67.9 years of age versus 59.0 /C68.4 years of age,
p<0.001), cerebral or peripheral artery disease (6.2%
versus 4.7%; p <0.001), family history of prematureCAD (34.6% versus 29.3%; p <0.001), and sedentary
lifestyle (53.5% versus 43.4%; p <0.001). Physician as-
sessments often misclassify chest pain as nonanginal.The BARI 2D (Bypass Angioplasty RevascularizationInvestigation 2 Diabetes) trial reported that women
with diabetes had a higher prevalence of angina than
their male counterparts, with a lower functional ca-pacity and a lower incidence of obstructive CAD ( 16).
2. In the VIRGO (Variation in Recovery: Role of Gender on
Outcomes of Young AMI Patients) study, men andwomen #55 years of age were equally likely to present
with chest pain (de ﬁned as pain, pressure, tightness,
discomfort; 89.5% versus 87 %, respectively). Women
were more likely to report $3 associated symptoms
than men (e.g., epigastric symptoms, palpitations, andpain or discomfort in the jaw, neck, arms, or betweenthe shoulder blades; 61.9% of women versus 54.8% ofmen; p <0.001) ( 3). Similar results were found in the
YOUNG-MI (Myocardial Inf arction) registry where
young men and women ( #50 years of age) were equally
likely to present with chest pain, although women were
more likely to also have other associated symptoms (
7).
The HERMES (Highly Effective Reperfusion Evaluatedin Multiple Endovascular Stroke) study used car-diolinguistic machine learning to record patient-reported symptoms and, in those diagnosed withobstructive CAD, there was no sex difference in theoccurrence of chest pain ( 6). In a prospective trial of
1941 patients (39% women) with suspected ACS
examining the diagnostic value of high-sensitivity
cardiac troponin (cTn), chest pain was reported in92% of women and 91% of men ( 5). Additionally,
women with acute myocardial infarction (AMI) weremore likely to present with “typical ”symptoms than
men (77% versus 59%; p ¼0.007).
2.1.2. Considerations for Older Patients With Chest Pain
Recommendation for Considerations for Older Patients With Chest Pain
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
1 C-LD1. In patients with chest pain who are >75 years of age, ACS should be considered when accompanying
symptoms such as shortness of breath, syncope, or ac ute delirium are present, or when an unexplained
fall has occurred ( 1).
Synopsis
Increased age is a signi ﬁcant risk factor for ACS.
However, it is also a risk factor for comorbidities thatare associated with alternative diagnoses associatedwith chest pain. As a resul t, a more extensive diag-
nostic workup is required in older patients. Although
patients >7 5y e a r so fa g ea c c o u n tf o r3 3 %o fa l lc a s e s
of ACS, alternative diagnoses are still more commonthan a cardiac cause of chest pain at presentation ( 2,3).
A substudy of the PROMISE trial has shown that pa-tients >75 years of age, with stable symptoms sug-
gestive of CAD, are more likely to have a positivenoninvasive test and more coronary artery calci ﬁcation
than younger people. For these older patients, when
compared with anatomic noninvasive testing for
obstructive CAD with cardiac CT, a positive stress testJACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021 Gulati et al .
NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285 2021 Chest Pain Guidelinee199

result was associated with i ncreased risk of cardio-
vascular death or MI ( 4).
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Patients >75 years of age may have symptoms of
shortness of breath, syncope, mental impairment, orabdominal pain, or experienced an unexplained fall.
The physician should have a heightened awareness tounderstand that these symptoms may be associatedwith ACS, in addition to chest pain ( 1).
2.1.3. Considerations for Diverse Patient Populations With
Chest Pain
Recommendations for Considerations for Diverse Patient Populations With Chest Pain
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 C-LD1. Cultural competency training is recommended to help achieve the best outcomes in patients of diverse
racial and ethnic backgrounds who present with chest pain.
1 C-LD2. Among patients of diverse race and ethnicity prese nting with chest pain in whom English may not be their
primary language, addressing language barrier s with the use of formal t ranslation services is
recommended.
Synopsis
There are marked racial and ethnic disparities when tri-
aging patients who present for the evaluation of chest pain.Despite a greater number of Black patients presenting withangina pectoris relative to other races, this population isless likely to be treated urgently and less likely to have an
ECG performed, samples for cardiac biomarkers drawn,
cardiac monitoring performed, or pulse oximetry measured(1-4). Similar treatment disparities are found with Hispanic
p a t i e n t sa n dt h o s ew h oa r ec o v e r e db yM e d i c a i do ra r euninsured. Derived from a nationally representative sam-ple from the National Hospital Ambulatory Health CareSurvey re ﬂecting an estimated 78 million ED visits in the
United States over a 10-year period, these ﬁndings have
been unchanged over time ( 5). Such disparity in the man-
agement of chest pain among diverse population subgroupscontributes to worse outcomes , including the greater inci-
dence of AMI and fatal coronary events seen in these keypopulation subgroups ( 6,7). There are also disparities in the
management of patients of South Asian descent who pre-sent with ACS, with the diagnosis often missed or delayed,resulting in poor outcomes ( 8-11). Consideration of race and
ethnicity in the evaluation of patients with suspected ACS
and in the outpatient evaluation of symptomatic patients isparamount to improving outcomes. Cultural competencytraining of providers is recommended to address healthdisparities in the evaluation and management of diversepatient population subgroups with chest pain.Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. In patients of various div erse groups presenting with
chest pain, cultural competency training of providers to
address racial and ethnic disparities may help toimprove diagnosis, treatment, and outcomes. Attentionto race, ethnicity, and sociocultural differences shouldbe considered in the evaluation and management ofsuch patients. Cultural com petency training can help
address dif ﬁculties in the assessment of patients
because there may be differences in the description and
perception of chest pain among various diverse patient
groups. Such training may also help to minimize po-tential unconscious biases on the part of providers.Disparities in the management of chest pain amongdiverse populations cont ribute to worse outcomes,
including the greater incidence of MI and fatal coronaryevents ( 1).
2. In patients of various racial and ethnic subgroups
presenting with suspected ACS in whom English may
not be their primary language, adequately addressinglanguage barriers with the use of language translationi sv i t a lt oo b t a i na na c c u r a t ea n dc o m p l e t eh i s t o r y .Formal translation services such as those providedthrough institutions and virtual translation arerecommended.
2.1.4. Patient-Centric Considerations
Recommendation for Patient-Centric Considerations
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
1 C-LD1. In patients with acute chest pain, it is recommended that 9-1-1 be activated by patients or bystanders to
initiate transport to the closest ED by emergency medical services (EMS) ( 1).Gulati et al . JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
2021 Chest Pain Guideline NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285e200

Synopsis
Although chest pain remains one of the most common
reasons that patients seek evaluation, among both sexes,there is a tendency for some patients to minimizeperceived risk for cardiac disease, resulting in potentially
avoidable delays in care ( 1). To alleviate this problem,
e f f o r t ss h o u l db em a d et oe d u c a t ea l lp e o p l er e g a r d i n gtheir risk for a cardiac event and educate patients aboutthe need for timely care if a heart attack is suspected.Education is essential regarding the need to call 9-1-1,provide transportation by EMS to the nearest ED, initiate
early assessment and management of suspected ACS,including transmittal of prehospital ECGs ( 2), and inter-
vene if complications occur en route to the ED ( 3). The
ACC ’s Early Heart Attack Care guide is a resource to help
educate the public about early recognition of potentialcardiac symptoms and the importance of activating 9-1-1for transportation ( 4,5).Recommendation-Speci ﬁcS u p p o r t i v eT e x t
1. To ensure the timely delivery of appropriate care,
especially reperfusion the rapy, it is strongly recom-
mended that patients with acute chest pain be trans-ported to the ED by trained EMS personnel ( 2,3). EMS
transportation is associated with substantial reductionsin ischemic time and treatment delays. Moreover, 1 in300 patients with chest pain transported to the ED byprivate vehicle suffers a cardiac arrest en route ( 3).
Understanding the mode of transportation to the ED for
patients with chest pain and educating those whoarrive by private vehicle on the associated dangers is animportant aspect of management.
2.2. Physical Examination
Recommendation for Physical Examination
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
1 C-EO1. In patients presenting with chest pain, a focused cardiovascular examination should be performed initially
to aid in the diagnosis of ACS or other potentially serio us causes of chest pain (e.g., aortic dissection, PE,
or esophageal rupture) and to identify complications.
Synopsis
Life-threatening causes of chest pain include, but are
n o tl i m i t e dt o ,A C S ,P E ,a o r t i cd i s s e c t i o n ,a n de s o p h a g e a lrupture. Because ST-segment –elevation myocardial
infarction (STEMI) can be recognized on the ECG, the
major challenge is to distinguish between non –ST-
segment –elevation (NSTE)-ACS and noncardiac chest pain
(1). With an uncomplicated AMI, the examination may be
negative. Sudden onset of severe chest pain or back painassociated with limb pulse differential suggest aorticdissection ( 2), but sensitivity of the latter ﬁnding alone
was only 30% ( 3). PE may result in tachycardia, dyspnea,
and accentuated P2. Noncoronary causes of chest paininclude aortic stenosis, aort ic regurgitation, and hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathy, which produces characteristic
murmurs and pulse alterations. Chest pain of pericarditisincreases in the supine position and may be associatedwith a friction rub. Stress cardiomyopathy presents in asimilar manner as ACS. Chest pain accompanied by apainful, tympanic abdomen may indicate a potentiallylife-threatening gastrointestinal etiology such as esopha-
geal rupture ( 4). Pneumonia may cause localized pleuritic
chest pain accompanied by a friction rub. Pneumothoraxmay be accompanied by pleuritic chest pain and unilateralabsence of breath sounds. Tenderness to palpation of thecostochondral joints may indicate a musculoskeletal
cause. Herpes zoster produces a painful rash in a derma-
tomal distribution.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁcS u p p o r t i v eT e x t
1. Although the causes of chest pain are numerous, the
initial evaluation should focus on those that are life-threatening, such as ACS, PE, aortic dissection, andesophageal rupture, to fac ilitate rapid implementation
of appropriate treatment ( 1). Speci ﬁcc l u e sc a nb e
helpful ( Table 4 ). Chest tenderness on palpation or pain
with inspiration markedly reduce the probability of ACS(1,5,6). Integrating the examination with other elements
of the evaluation is crucial to establishing the correctdiagnosis.JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021 Gulati et al .
NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285 2021 Chest Pain Guidelinee201

TABLE 4 Physical Examination in Patients With Chest Pain
Clinical Syndrome Findings
EmergencyACS Diaphoresis, tachypnea, tachycardia, hypotension, crackles, S3, MR murmur ( 2); examination may be normal in
uncomplicated cases
PE Tachycardia þdyspnea —>90% of patients; pain with inspiration ( 7)
Aortic dissection Connective tissue disorders (e.g., Marfan syndrome), extremity pulse differential (30% of patients, type A >B) (8)
Severe pain, abrupt onset þpulse differential þwidened mediastinum on CXR >80% probability of dissection ( 9)
Frequency of syncope >10% ( 8), AR 40% –75% (type A) ( 10)
Esophageal rupture Emesis, subcutaneous emphysema, pneumothorax (20% patients), unilateral decreased or absent breath soundsOther
Noncoronary cardiac: AS, AR, HCM AS: Characteristic systolic murmur, tardus or parvus carotid pulse
AR: Diastolic murmur at right of sternum, rapid carotid upstrokeHCM: Increased or displaced left ventricular impulse, prominent awave in jugular venous pressure, systolic murmur
Pericarditis Fever, pleuritic chest pain, increased in supine position, friction rub
Myocarditis Fever, chest pain, heart failure, S3Esophagitis, peptic ulcer disease, gall bladder
diseaseEpigastric tenderness
Right upper quadrant tenderness, Murphy sign
Pneumonia Fever, localized chest pain, may be pleuritic, friction rub may be present, regional dullness to percussion, egophony
Pneumothorax Dyspnea and pain on inspiration, unilateral absence of breath soundsCostochondritis, Tietze syndrome Tenderness of costochondral jointsHerpes zoster Pain in dermatomal distribution, triggered by touch; characteristic rash (unilateral and dermatomal distribution)
ACS indicates acute coronary syndrome; AR, aortic regurgitation; AS, aortic stenosis; CXR, chest x-ray; LR, likelihood ratio; HCM, hypertrophic ca rdiomyopathy; MR, mitral regurgi-
tation; PE, pulmonary embolism; and PUD, peptic ulcer disease.
2.3. Diagnostic Testing
2.3.1. Setting Considerations
Recommendations for Setting Considerations
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplement 5 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. Unless a noncardiac cause is evident, an ECG should be performed for patients seen in the of ﬁce setting
with stable chest pain; if an ECG is unavailable the patient should be referred to the ED so one can beobtained ( 1-5).
1 C-LD2. Patients with clinical evidence of ACS or other life-threatening causes of acute chest pain seen in the
ofﬁce setting should be transported urgently to the ED, ideally by EMS ( 1-9).
1 C-LD3. In all patients who present with acute chest pain reg ardless of the setting, an ECG should be acquired and
reviewed for STEMI within 10 minutes of arrival ( 1-3,6,7,10).
1 C-LD4. In all patients presenting to the ED with acute chest pain and suspected ACS, cTn should be measured as
soon as possible after presentation ( 8,9).
3: Harm C-LD5. For patients with acute chest pain and suspected ACS initially evaluated in the of ﬁce setting, delayed
transfer to the ED for cTn or other diagnostic testing should be avoided.Gulati et al . JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
2021 Chest Pain Guideline NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285e202

Synopsis
The goals in patients presenting to the ED or of ﬁce with
acute chest pain are: 1) identify life-threatening causes; 2)determine clinical stability; and 3) assess need for hospi-talization versus safety of outpatient evaluation and
management. These concerns entail consideration of the
full extent of clinical da ta. The ACC/AHA STEMI and
NSTE-ACS guidelines categorize chest pain cause into 4types: STEMI, NSTE-ACS, stable angina, and noncardiac(6,7) .T h e1 2 - l e a dE C G ,w h i c hs h o u l db ea c q u i r e da n d
interpreted within 10 minut es of arrival to a medical fa-
cility ( 1-7,11)(Section 2.3.2 , ECG), is pivotal in the evalu-
ation because of its capacity to identify and triage
patients with STEMI to urgent coronary reperfusion.
Other ST-T abnormalities consistent with possibleischemia also mandate prompt evaluation in a hospitalsetting. In both cases, transfer should be by EMS; personalautomobile for this purpose is associated with increasedrisk and should be avoided ( 3-5). Patients with stable
angina or noncardiac chest pain that is not life-threatening should be managed as outpatients.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. The ECG is central to the evaluation of stable angina in
the of ﬁce setting to ensure that ACS is not missed
(1,2,6,7). If an ECG cannot be obtained, transfer to the
ED should be initiated.
2. Transfer by EMS from the of ﬁce setting for acute chest
pain with suspected ACS or other life-threating condi-tions is recommended because of the important ad-
vantages provided by EMS including: 1) acquisition of aprehospital ECG, which can facilitate reperfusion if STelevation is present; 2) presence of trained personnelwho can provide treatment for chest pain, arrhythmias,
and implement de ﬁbrillation en route; and 3) shorter
travel time to the ED ( 1-7,10).
3. Early recognition of STEMI improves outcomes
(1-3,6,7). Therefore, regardless of the setting, an ECG
should be obtained and interpreted within 10 minutesof arrival. If this cannot be achieved in the of ﬁce
setting, immediate transfer to the ED by EMS is rec-ommended. A substantial proportion of patients with
chest pain are transferred to the ED without a pre-
hospital ECG ( 1-3,6,7). This results in an important and
avoidable delay in readiness of the ED and reperfusionteams to implement optimally timed reperfusiontherapy ( 1-7,10).
4. cTn is the most sensitive test for diagnosing acute
myocardial injury and, in conjunction with othere s s e n t i a lc l i n i c a ld a t a( e . g . ,h i s t o r y ,e x a m i n a t i o n ,E C G ) ,its measurement is necessary to implement appro-priate therapy ( 8,9).
5. Delayed transfer to the hospital for determination of
cTn or other diagnostic testing beyond the ECG in theofﬁce setting can be detrimental and should be avoided
(1-7,10).
2.3.2. Electrocardiogram
Recommendations for Electrocardiogram
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplement 6 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 C-EO1. In patients with chest pain in which an initial ECG is nondiagnostic, serial ECGs to detect potential
ischemic changes should be performed, especially whe n clinical suspicion of ACS is high, symptoms are
persistent, or the clinical condition deteriorates ( 1).
1 C-EO2. Patients with chest pain in whom the initial ECG is consistent with an ACS should be treated according to
STEMI and NSTE-ACS guidelines ( 1,2).
2a B-NR3. In patients with chest pain and intermediate-to-hi gh clinical suspicion for ACS in whom the initial ECG is
nondiagnostic, supplemental electrocardiographic leads V7 to V9 are reasonable to rule out posterior MI
(3-5).
Synopsis
Patients with chest pain and new ST-elevation, ST
depression, or new left bundle branch block on ECGshould be treated according to STEMI and NSTE-ACSguidelines ( 1,2,6). An initial normal ECG does not
exclude ACS. Patients with a n initial normal ECG should
have a repeat ECG, if symptoms are ongoing, until otherdiagnostic testing rules out ACS. An ECG may identifyother nonischemic causes of chest pain (e.g., pericarditis,myocarditis, arrhythmia, electrolyte abnormalities, pacedrhythm, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, pulmonary hy-
pertension, congenital long QT, or normal variant).Figure 4 depicts an algorithm for the role of the ECG to
help direct care for individuals presenting with chest painor chest pain equivalents.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁcS u p p o r t i v eT e x t
1. When an ECG is nondiagnostic, it should be compared
with previous ECGs, if available ( 7). A normal or un-
changed ECG is reasonably useful but not suf ﬁcient atJACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021 Gulati et al .
NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285 2021 Chest Pain Guidelinee203

ruling out ACS ( 8-10 ). Thus, decision-making should
not be based solely on a single normal or nondiagnosticECG. Left ventricular hypertrophy, bundle branchblocks, and ventricular pacing may mask signs ofischemia or injury ( 11). Up to 6% of patients with
evolving ACS are discharg ed from the ED with a normal
ECG ( 12-17 ). In patients where the initial ECG is normal
or is without ST elevation, hyperacute T waves, leftbundle branch block, or ST depression, serial ECGsshould be performed and management should beguided by new electrocardiographic changes or otherdiagnostic testing (see Section 2.3.4 on Biomarkers,
Section 3.1 on Anatomic Testing, or Section 3.2 on
Stress Testing) ( 7,18-20 ). The timing for repeat ECG
should also be guided by symptoms, especially if chestpain recurs or a change in clinical condition develops
(21).
2. When ST-elevation is present on the initial ECG, man-
agement should follow the prescribed STEMI treatmentalgorithms in associated guidelines ( 2,22). Further-
more, if ST depression is identi ﬁed on the initial ECG,
management should follow the NSTE-ACS guidelines
(1).
3. A normal ECG may be associated with left circum ﬂex or
right coronary artery occl usions and posterior wall
ischemia, which is often “electrically silent ”; therefore,
right-sided ECG leads should be considered when suchlesions are suspected ( 2-5).
2.3.3. Chest Radiography
Recommendation for Chest Radiography
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
1 C-EO1. In patients presenting with acute chest pain, a chest radiograph is useful to evaluate for other potential
cardiac, pulmonary, and thoracic causes of symptoms.FIGURE 4 Electrocardiographic-Directed Management of Chest Pain
ECG indicates electrocardiogram; NSTE-ACS, non –ST-segment –elevation acute coronary syndrome; MI, myocardial infarction; and STEMI, ST-segment –
elevation myocardial infarction.Gulati et al . JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
2021 Chest Pain Guideline NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285e204

Synopsis
Chest radiographs are rapid, noninvasive tests that
can be used to screen for several disorders that maypresent with chest pain. The yield of chest radiographydepends on the pretest probability and will thus be
higher when history or physical examination point to a
greater likelihood of a given diagnosis. However, chestradiographs often do not lead to a diagnosis that requiresintervention ( 1), and their use should be guided by
clinical suspicion.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. The AHA/ACC guidelines for NSTE-ACS and heart fail-
ure all recommend chest radiographs on presentation,although this should not delay urgent revascularizationif it is indicated ( 2,3). In patients with acute chest painand heart failure, chest radiographs are useful to assess
heart size and pulmonary congestion, as well as iden-tifying potential pulmonary causes that may havecontributed to symptoms. Chest radiographs maydemonstrate a widened mediastinum in patients with
aortic dissection, although they are not sensitive
enough in this setting to rule out the diagnosis ( 4).
Chest radiographs may be most useful in the evaluationof patients with acute chest pain to detect alternativecardiac, pulmonary, or other conditions that may causesymptoms, including pneumonia, pneumothorax, or ribfractures. Pleural effusions , pulmonary artery enlarge-
ment, and in ﬁltrates may suggest PE, which would
need to be con ﬁrmed by further testing.
2.3.4. Biomarkers
Recommendations for Biomarkers
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplement 7 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In patients presenting with acute chest pain, serial c Tn I or T levels are useful to identify abnormal values
and a rising or falling pattern indi cative of acute myocardial injury ( 1-21).
1 B-NR2. In patients presenting with acute chest pain, high- sensitivity cTn is the preferred biomarker because it
enables more rapid detection or exclusion of myoc ardial injury and increases diagnostic accuracy
(17,21-25 ).
1 C-EO3. Clinicians should be familiar with the analytical p erformance and the 99th percentile upper reference
limit that de ﬁnes myocardial injury for the cTn assay used at their institution ( 23,26).
3: No bene ﬁt B-NR4. With availability of cTn, creatine kinase myocardi al (CK-MB) isoenzyme and myoglobin are not useful for
diagnosis of acute myocardial injury ( 27-32 ).
Synopsis
Cardiovascular biomarkers can be useful for the diag-
nostic and prognostic assessment of patients with chestpain. Their most important application in clinical practiceis for the rapid identi ﬁcation or exclusion of myocardial
injury. The preferred biomarker to detect or excludemyocardial injury is cTn (I or T) because of its highsensitivity and speci ﬁcity for myocardial tissue ( 1-21,33).
hs-cTn is preferred and can detect circulating cTn in the
blood of most “healthy ”individuals, with different sex-
speci ﬁc thresholds ( 17,21,34). cTn is organ-speci ﬁcb u t
not disease-speci ﬁc. Numerous ischemic, noncoronary
cardiac, and noncardiac causes of cardiomyocyte injuryc a nr e s u l ti ne l e v a t e dc T nc o n c e n t r a t i o n s( 17,21,24,25).
Therefore, interpretation of cTn results requires integra-tion with all clinical information ( 17,21).Although multiple other cardiovascular biomarkers,
including some in common clinical use such as natriureticpeptides, have been shown to be associated with the riskof adverse cardiovascular outcomes in patients with chestp a i n ,n o n eh a v es u f ﬁcient diagnostic accuracy for
myocardial injury to be recommended for that purpose.T h eu s eo fD - d i m e rf o rd i a g n o s i so fP Ei sd i s c u s s e di nSection 4.2.2 .
Recommendation-Speci ﬁcS u p p o r t i v eT e x t
1. The preferred biomarker to detect or exclude cardiac
injury is cTn (I or T) because of its high sensitivity and
speci ﬁcity for myocardial tissue ( 1-21). Detection of
myocardial cell injury, possibly indicative of AMI, ispredicated on a rise or fall of this biomarker in blood(1,3,4,10-21 ). A cTn concentration >99th percentileJACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021 Gulati et al .
NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285 2021 Chest Pain Guidelinee205

upper reference limit, which is assay-dependent, is an
indicator of myocardial injury ( 1,9,21). The coef ﬁcient
of variation at the 99th percentile upper reference limitfor each assay should be #10% ( 8,21).
2. There is ample evidence for the superiority of hs-cTn
assays over conventional cTn assays in multiple as-
pects of evaluation for patients presenting with chestpain with and without AMI ( 17,21,24,25,33). The sensi-
tivity and negative predictive values are greater withhs-cTn compared with previous generation assays(17,21,24,25). In addition, the time interval from onset
of chest pain to a detectable concentration at patientpresentation is shorter with hs-cTn, affording more
r a p i dr u l e - i na n dr u l e - o u ta l g o r i t h m s( 22). Although it
is sometimes challenging to diagnostically discrimi-nate among these causes of myocardial injury, irre-spective of the ﬁnal diagnosis, the presence of
myocardial injury is associated with a higher risk ofadverse outcomes among patients with chest pain ( 35).
3. The level of detection, 99th percentile upper reference
limit, analytical precision, and criteria for a signi ﬁcant
delta are assay-speci ﬁc, including among the many
different manufacturers o ft h es a m ea n a l y t e( e . g . ,hs-cTnI). To appropriately apply a cTn assay, clinicians
must be familiar with these analytical performance
properties for the assay(s) that they use in their prac-tice ( 21).
4. Comparative studies have con ﬁrmed the superiority of
cTn over CK-MB and myoglobin for diagnosis and
prognosis of AMI ( 27-32 ). The addition of CK-MB or
myoglobin to cTn for evaluation of patients presentingwith chest pain is not bene ﬁcial.
3. CARDIAC TESTING GENERAL
CONSIDERATIONS
For acute and stable chest pain , noninvasive and invasive
diagnostic testing is a core component of the evaluationunderpinning its importance. Over the past decade, thequality of evidence supporting clinical indications fornoninvasive testing has grown dramatically. The
approach outlined in this guideline focuses on selective
use of testing, optimizatio n of lower cost evaluations,
reducing layered testing, a nd deferring or eliminating
testing when the diagnostic yield is low ( Figure 5 ).
FIGURE 5 Chest Pain and Cardiac Testing Considerations
The choice of imaging depends on the clinical question of importance, to either a) ascertain the diagnosis of CAD and de ﬁne coronary anatomy or b) assess ischemia
severity among patients with an expected higher likelihood of ischemia with an abnormal resting ECG or those incapable of performing maximal exercis e. ACS indicates
acute coronary syndrome; CAC, coronary artery calcium; CAD, coronary artery disease; and ECG, electrocardiogram. Please refer to Section 4.1 . For risk assessment in
acute chest pain, see Figure 9 . For risk assessment in stable chest pain, see Figure 11 .Gulati et al . JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
2021 Chest Pain Guideline NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285e206

Reducing unnecessary testing can provide a means to
exert cost savings within the diagnostic evaluationof populations ( 1). In the same manner, elimination of
testing where evidence is lacking and the reduction intesting among low-risk pa tients for whom deferred
testing is appropriate are emphasized in this guideline.
Testing choice will be in ﬂuenced by site expertise and
availability, but knowledge regarding which test may bepreferable is useful when selecting between differentmodalities. Cost should also be considered, when knownby the ordering clinician and there is equipoise betweenavailable modalities ( 2) .T h ee x e r c i s eE C Gi st h el o w e s t
cost procedure used in the diagnostic evaluation when
compared with stress imaging or anatomic procedures,
with the exception of coronary artery calcium (CAC)scoring ( Figure 6 ). For all imaging procedures, costs vary
by payer and site of services.
The following sections provide a brief overview of the
various noninvasive tests available for use in the eval-uation of symptomatic patients. Previously, the termknown as CAD had been used to de ﬁne those with a
signi ﬁcant obstructive stenosis (i.e., $50%). In this
guideline, we revise the term known CAD to include
patients with prior anatomic testing (invasive angiog-raphy or coronary computed tomographic angiography[CCTA]) with identi ﬁed nonobstructive atherosclerotic
plaque and obstructive CAD. We recognize this is a de-parture from convention, but our intent was to ensurethat those with lesser degrees of stenosis who do not
require coronary intervention but would bene ﬁtf r o m
optimized preventive therapy do not get overlooked.However, throughout the document, the term “obstruc-
tive”, consistent with convention, will be used to indi-
cate CAD with $50% stenosis and nonobstructive CAD
will be used to indicate CAD <50% stenosis. In addition,
the term “high risk CAD ”is used to denote patients with
obstructive stenosis who have left main stenosis $50%
or anatomically signi ﬁcant 3-vessel disease ( $70%
stenosis).
3.1. Anatomic Testing
3.1.1. Coronary Computed Tomography Angiography
CCTA can visualize and help to diagnose the extent and
severity of nonobstructive and obstructive CAD, as well asatherosclerotic plaque composition and high-risk features(e.g., positive remodeling, low attenuation plaque) ( 1-8).
Calculation of fractional ﬂow reserve with CT (FFR-CT)
provides an estimation of lesion-speci ﬁci s c h e m i a( 9).Current radiation dosimetry is low for CCTA, with effec-
tive doses for most patients in the 3 to 5 mSv range ( 10).
CCTA contraindications are reported in Table 5 Although
in select situations imaging protocols that evaluate thecoronary arteries, aorta, and pulmonary arteries may be
useful, the general approach should be to use imaging
protocols tailored to the most likely diagnosis, rather thana“triple rule out ”approach ( Figure 6 ).
3.1.2. Invasive Coronary Angiography
Invasive coronary angiography (ICA) de ﬁnes the presence
and severity of a luminal obstruction of an epicardialcoronary artery, including its location, length, and diam-eter, as well as coronary blood ﬂow (
1,2). For ICA, the
primary goal is the characterization and detection of ahigh-grade obstructive stenosis to de ﬁne feasibility and
necessity of percutaneous or surgical revascularization.The use of physiologic indices (IFR and FFR) provides
complementary functi onal information ( 1). Radiation
exposure to the patient during an interventional proced-ure averages 4 to 10 mSv and is dependent on proceduralduration and complexity ( 3,4).
ICA has a spatial resolution of 0.3 mm; as such, it is
impossible to visualize arterioles (diameter of 0.1 mm)that regulate myocardial blood ﬂow (5). Coronary vascular
functional studies can be performed during coronary
angiography. Normal angiography does not exclude
abnormal coronary vascular function, and it is possible toassess coronary microcirculation and coronary vaso-motion. Coronary function testing may assist in manage-ment of the underlying condition, in addition toproviding prognostic information ( 6-8).
3.2. Diagnostic Testing
3.2.1. Exercise ECG
Symptom-limited exercise ECG involves graded exercise
until physical fatigue, limiting chest pain (or discomfort),marked ischemia, or a drop in blood pressure occurs ( 1).
C a n d i d a t e sf o re x e r c i s eE C Ga r et h o s e :a )w i t h o u t
disabling comorbidity (e.g., frailty, marked obesity [body
mass index >40 kg/m
2], peripheral artery disease, chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease, or orthopedic limitations)and capable of performing activities of daily living or ableto achieve $5 metabolic equivalents of exercise (METs)
(2); and b) without rest ST-T abnormalities (e.g., >0.5-mm
ST depression, left ventricular hypertrophy, pacedrhythm, left bundle branch blo ck, Wolff-Parkinson-White
pattern, or digitalis use). Ex ercise electrocardiographic
contraindication s are reported in Table 5 .JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021 Gulati et al .
NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285 2021 Chest Pain Guidelinee207

3.2.2. Echocardiography/Stress Echocardiography
Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) can visualize and
aid in the differential diagnosis among the numerous
causes of acute chest pain such as acute aortic dissection,
pericardial effusion, str ess cardiomyopathy, andhypertrophic cardiomyopathy ( 1,2). Although TTE does
provide information, for patients with acute chest pain,
visualization of left and right ventricular function and
regional wall motion abnormalities allows for the assess-
ment of CAD risk and may help to guide clinical decision-FIGURE 6 Choosing the Right Diagnostic Test
ASCVD indicates atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease; CAD, coronary artery disease; CAC, coronary artery calcium; CCTA, coronary computed tom ography angiog-
raphy; CMR, cardiovascular magnetic resonance; ETT, exercise tolerance test; LV, left ventricular; MPI, myocardial perfusion imaging; PET, posit ron emission to-
mography and SPECT, single-photon emission computed tomography.Gulati et al . JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
2021 Chest Pain Guideline NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285e208

making. Performance of TTE at the bedside is ideal for
patients with acute chest pain and can be done using
point-of-care or handheld devices in institutions where
such capabilities are available.
After ACS has been ruled out, stress echocardiography
can be used to de ﬁne ischemia severity and for risk
strati ﬁcation purposes. For TTE and stress echocardiog-
raphy, ultrasound-enhancing agents are helpful for leftventricular opaci ﬁcation when $2 contiguous segments
or a coronary territory is poorly visualized ( 3). Coronary
ﬂow velocity reserve in the mid-distal left anterior
descending coronary artery has been shown to improverisk strati ﬁcation and may be helpful in the select patient
with known CAD, including nonobstructive CAD ( 4-6).
Contraindications to stress type (exercise versus phar-macologic) and stress echocardiography are reported inTable 5 .
3.2.3. Stress Nuclear (PET or SPECT) Myocardial Perfusion
Imaging
After ACS has been ruled out, rest/stress positron emis-
sion tomography (PET) or single-photon emission
computed tomography (SPECT) myocardial perfusion
imaging (MPI) allows for detection of perfusionabnormalities, measures of left ventricular function, and
high-risk ﬁndings, such as transient ischemic dilation ( 1-
8). For PET, calculation of myocardial blood ﬂow reserve
(MBFR, the ratio of peak hyperemia to resting myocar-dial blood ﬂow) adds diagnostic and prognostic infor-
mation over MPI data ( 9-14). Radiation exposure, as
reported by an average effective dose, is w3m S vf o r
rest/stress PET with Rb-82 and w10 mSv for Tc-99m
SPECT; dual- isotope SPECT using thallium is not rec-ommended ( 15-17 ). SPECT/PET contraindications are and
contraindications to type of s tress test (exercise versus
pharmacologic) are reported in Table 5 .
3.2.4. Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging
has the capability to accurately assess global andregional left and right ventricular function, detectand localize myocardial ischemia and infarction, anddetermine myocardial viability. CMR can also detectmyocardial edema and micr ovascular obstruction,
which can help differentiate acute versus chronic MI,as well as other causes of acute chest pain, including
myocarditis. CMR contraindications are reported in
Table 5 .
TABLE 5 Contraindication by Type of Imaging Modality and Stress Protocol
Exercise ECG Stress Nuclear ( 1)* Stress Echocardiography ( 2-5) Stress CMR ( 6)C C T A ( 7)*
nAbnormal ST changes on resting
ECG, digoxin, left bundle branch
block, Wolff-Parkinson-White
pattern, ventricular paced rhythm
(unless test is performed toestablish exercise capacity and not
for diagnosis of ischemia)
nUnable to achieve $5M E T so ru n -
safe to exercise
nHigh-risk unstable angina or AMI ( <2d )
i.e., active ACS
nUncontrolled heart failure
nSigni ﬁcant cardiac arrhythmias
(e.g., VT, complete atrioventricular
block) or high risk for arrhythmias
caused by QT prolongation
nSevere symptomatic aortic stenosis
nSevere systemic arterial hyperten-sion (e.g., $200/110 mm Hg)nHigh-risk unstable
angina, complicated ACS
or AMI ( <2d )
nContraindications to
vasodilator
administration
nSigni ﬁcant arrhyth-
mias (e.g., VT, sec-ond- or third-degree
atrioventricular
block) or sinus
bradycardia <45 bpm
nSigni ﬁcant hypoten-
sion (SBP <90
mm Hg)
nKnown or suspected
bronchoconstrictive
or bronchospastic
diseasenLimited acoustic windows
(e.g., in COPD patients)
nInability to reach target heart
rate
nUncontrolled heart failure
nHigh-risk unstable angina,active ACS or AMI ( <2d )
nSerious ventricular arrhythmia
or high risk for arrhythmias
attributable to QT
prolongation
nRespiratory failure
nSevere COPD, acute pulmo-
nary emboli, severe pulmo-
nary hypertension
nContraindications to dobut-amine (if pharmacologic stresstest needed)nReduced GFR ( <30
mL/min/1.73 m2)
nContraindications
to vasodilator
administration
nImplanted devicesnot safe for CMR or
producing artifactlimiting scan qual-
ity/interpretation
nSigni ﬁcant
claustrophobia
nCaffeine use withinpast 12 hnAllergy to iodinated contrast
nInability to cooperate with scanacquisition and/or breath-holdinstructions
nClinical instability (e.g., acuterespiratory distress, severe hy-
potension, unstable arrhythmia)
nRenal impairment as de ﬁned by
local protocols
nContraindication to betablockade in the presence of anelevated heart rate and no
alternative medications available
for achieving target heart rate
nHeart rate variability and
arrhythmia
nContraindication to nitroglycerin(if indicated)
Continued on the next pageJACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021 Gulati et al .
NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285 2021 Chest Pain Guidelinee209

3.3. Cardiac Testing Considerations for Women Who Are
Pregnant, Postpartum, or of Child-Bearing Age
This guideline focuses on elective and urgent cardiac
testing and, in both circumstances, imaging using
ionizing radiation during pre gnancy or postpartum while
breast feeding should generally be avoided. When imag-ing is necessary to guide management, the risks andbene ﬁts of invasive angiography, SPECT, PET, or CCTA
should be discussed with the patient. In all cases for a testdeemed clinically necessary, the lowest effective dose ofionizing radiation should be used, including consider-
ations for tests with no radiation exposure (e.g., echo-
cardiography, CMR imaging) ( 1). Radiation risk to the
fetus is very small. Iodinated contrast enters the fetalcirculation through the pla centa and should be used with
caution in a pregnant woman. The use of gadoliniumcontrast with CMR should be discouraged and used onlywhen necessary to guide clinical management and is ex-pected to improve fetal or maternal outcome ( 2-5). If
contrast is needed for a post partum woman, breastfeed-
ing may continue because <1% of iodinated contrast isexcreted into the breast milk and absorbed into the in-
fant ’s gastrointestinal tract ( 6).
4. CHOOSING THE RIGHT PATHWAY WITH
PATIENT-CENTRIC ALGORITHMS FORACUTE CHEST PAIN
After initial evaluation, the next step is determining
whether further diagnostic testing is needed to establish a
diagnosis or formulate a disposition plan. In some cases,
there is clearly minimal risk of a serious medical conditionalthough, in others, uncertainty may remain. We provideguidance to help clinicians make this determination withinthe context of acute and stable chest pain presentations.
The initial assessment of patients presenting with acute
chest pain is focused on the rapid identi ﬁcation of patients
with immediately life-threatening conditions such that
appropriate medical interventions can be initiated.
Included among the potentially life-threatening (emer-gency) causes of chest pain are ACS ( Section 4.1 ), acute
aortic syndromes ( Section 4.2.1 ), and PE ( Section 4.2.2 ).TABLE 5 Continued
Exercise ECG Stress Nuclear ( 1)* Stress Echocardiography ( 2-5) Stress CMR ( 6)C C T A ( 7)*
nAcute illness (e.g., acute PE, acute
myocarditis/pericarditis, acuteaortic dissection)nRecent use of dipyr-idamole ordipyridamole-
containing
medications
nUse of methylxan-thines (e.g.,aminophylline,
caffeine) within 12 h
nKnown hypersensi-
tivity to adenosine,
regadenoson
nSevere systemic arterialhypertension
(e.g.,$200/110 mm Hg)nAtrioventricular block, un-
controlled atrialﬁbrillation
nCritical aortic stenosis †
nAcute illness (e.g., acute
PE, acute myocarditis/
pericarditis, acute aortic
dissection)
nHemodynamically signi ﬁ-
cant LV out ﬂow tract
obstruction
nContraindications to atro-pine use:
nNarrow-angle
glaucoma
nMyasthenia gravis
nObstructive
uropathy
nObstructive gastro
intestinal disorders
nSevere systemic arterial hy-pertension (e.g., $200/110
mm Hg)
Use of Contrast Contraindicated in
:
nHypersensitivity to per ﬂutren
nHypersensitivity to blood,
blood products, or albumin
(for Optison only)
For all the imaging modalities, inability to achieve high-quality images should be considered, in particular for obese patients
Readers should also review each imaging society ’s guidelines for more details on test contraindications ( 1-14).
*Screening for potential pregnancy by history and/or pregnancy testing should be performed according to the local imaging facilities policies for u ndertaking radiological examinations that involve
ionizing radiation in women of child-bearing age.
†Low-dose dobutamine may be useful for assessing for low-gradient AS.
ACS indicates acute coronary syndrome; AMI, acute myocardial infarction; AS, aortic stenosis; CCTA, coronary computed tomography angiography; CM R, cardiovascular magnetic resonance
imaging; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; GFR, glomerular ﬁltration rate; LV, left ventricular; MET, metabolic equivalent; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; PE, pulmonary embolism;
SBP, systolic blood pressure; and VT, ventricular tachycardia.Gulati et al . JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
2021 Chest Pain Guideline NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285e210

Myopericarditis is heterogeneous in its manifestations but
can include fulminant myocarditis, which carries a highmortality rate ( Section 4.2.3 ). A subset of noncardiovascular
syndromes are also immediately life-threatening, includingesophageal rupture ( Section 4.3.1 ), tension pneumothorax,
and sickle cell chest crisis. Nonemergency causes of chest
pain, such as costochondritis and other musculoskeletal, orgastrointestinal causes, are discussed in Section 4.3 .S u c h
nonemergency causes predominate among patients pre-senting with acute chest pain; therefore, strategies thatincorporate routine, liberal use of testing carry the potentialfor adverse effects of unnecessary investigations and un-
necessary cost. Figure 7 provides an overview of this
approach.
FIGURE 7 Patient-Centric Algorithms for Acute Chest Pain
ECG indicates electrocardiogram; and STEMI, ST-segment –elevation myocardial infarction.JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021 Gulati et al .
NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285 2021 Chest Pain Guidelinee211

4.1. Patients With Acute Chest Pain and Suspected ACS
(Not Including STEMI)
Synopsis
Patients with acute chest pain and suspected ACS cover
a spectrum of disease likelihood and strati ﬁcation into
low- versus intermediate- or high-risk groups once STEMIhas been excluded ( Figure 8 ). This strati ﬁcation is
important to guide subsequent management. Although
most high-risk patients identi ﬁed by CDPs should un-
dergo cardiac catheterization, these patients still require aclinical assessment to determine if invasive evaluation isappropriate.
Chest pain risk scores provide a summative assessment
combining clinical information, such as age, ST segmentchanges on ECG, symptoms, CAD risk factors, and cTn
(Table 6 )t oe s t i m a t eap a t i e n t ’s probability of ACS or risk
of 30-day major adverse card iovascular events (MACE)
(30-35 ). Risk scores are essential when conventional cTn
assays are used. Based on emerging data, the hs-cTnresult may be more predictive than other clinical com-ponents of the risk score ( 36-43 ).
Chest pain protocols are intended to add structure to
the process of patient evaluation. Although various terms
such as accelerated diagnostic protocols or disposition
pathways have been used to describe such protocols, theycan collectively be referred to as CDPs. CDPs are generallyused to help guide disposition, but some also includeguidance for cardiac testing o f intermediate-risk patients
(30,31,33,34).Compared with an unstructured clinical assessment,
CDPs have been shown to decrease unnecessary testingand reduce admissions while ma intaining high sensitivity
for detection of acute myocardial injury and 30-day MACE(Table 6 ). The warranty period of prior cardiac testing
should be considered when symptoms are unchanged
(Table 7 ). Low-risk chest pain has been de ﬁned in Table 8 .
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. CDPs that are based on cTn results have proven valid
and useful in clinical practice ( 1-14). Use of unstructured
assessment for clinical deci sion-making often leads to
both under- and overtesting. To improve on this, pro-tocols have been developed t o rapidly detect (rule in)
and to rapidly exclude or “rule out ”acute myocardial
injury, incorporating time-dependent serial cTn sam-pling. Some protocols include chest pain risk scoreswhile others do not. CDPs have been shown to help
avoid admission or further testing in 21.3% to 43% of
eligible patients and should be routinely used in clinicalpractice ( 31,45,50). To standardize the approach to pa-
tient care and ensure consistency in decision-making,CDPs should be implemented at the institution level.There are multiple CDPs from which to choose, and allgenerally involve single o r serial cTn measurement.
B e c a u s et h e r ea r es e v e r a ld i fferent manufacturers, theRecommendations for Patients With Acute Chest Pain and Suspected ACS (Not Including STEMI)
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplements 8 and 9 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In patients presenting with acute chest pain and suspected ACS, clinical decision pathways (CDPs) should
categorize patients into low-, intermediate-, and high -risk strata to facilitate disposition and subsequent
diagnostic evaluation ( 1-14).
1 B-NR2. In the evaluation of patients presenting with acute chest pain and suspected ACS for whom serial troponins
are indicated to exclude myocardial injury, recommen ded time intervals after the initial troponin sample
collection (time zero) for repeat measurements are: 1 to 3 hours for high-sensitivity troponin and 3 to 6
hours for conventional troponin assays ( 15-17 ).
1 C-LD3. To standardize the detection and differentiation of myocardial injury in patients presenting with acute
chest pain and suspected ACS, insti tutions should implement a CDP that i ncludes a protocol for troponin
sampling based on their particular assay ( 18,19)
1 C-LD4. In patients with acute chest pain and suspected ACS, previous testing when availa b l es h o u l db ec o n s i d e r e d
a n di n c o r p o r a t e di n t oC D P s( 20-24 ).
2a B-NR5. For patients with acute chest pain, a normal ECG, and symptoms suggestive of ACS that began at least
3 hours before ED arrival, a single hs-cTn concentration that is below the limit of detection on initial
measurement (time zero) is reasonable to exclude myocardial injury ( 13,25-29 ).Gulati et al . JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
2021 Chest Pain Guideline NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285e212

FIGURE 8 General Approach to Risk Strati ﬁcation of Patients With Suspected ACS
ACS indicates acute coronary syndrome; CDP, clinical decision pathway; and ECG, electrocardiogram.
TABLE 6 Sample Clinical Decisi on Pathways Used to De ﬁne Risk
HEART Pathway
(31)EDACS
(44)ADAPT (mADAPT)
(45)NOTR
(34)2020 ESC/hs-cTn *
(46,47)2016 ESC/GRACE
(11,38)
Target population Suspected ACS Suspected ACS, CP >5 min,
planned serial troponinSuspected ACS, CP >5
min, planned
observationSuspected ACS, ECG,
troponin orderedSuspected ACS, stable Suspected ACS,
planned serial
troponin
Target outcome [ED discharge without
increasing missed
30-d or 1-y MACE[ED discharge rate without
increasing missed
30-d MACE[ED discharge rate
without increasing
missed 30-d MACE[Low-risk classi ﬁcation
without increasing
missed 30-d MACEEarly detection of AMI;
30-d MACEEarly detection of AMI
Patients with primary
outcome in study
population, %6–22 12 15 5 –8 9.8 10 –17
Troponin cTn, hs-cTn hs-cTn cTn, hs-cTn cTn, hs-cTn hs-cTn cTn, hs-cTn
Continued on the next pageJACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021 Gulati et al .
NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285 2021 Chest Pain Guidelinee213

TABLE 6 Continued
HEART Pathway
(31)EDACS
(44)ADAPT (mADAPT)
(45)NOTR
(34)2020 ESC/hs-cTn *
(46,47)2016 ESC/GRACE
(11,38)
Variables used History
ECGAge
Risk factors
Troponin (0, 3 h)Age
SexRisk factors
History
Troponin (0, 2 h)TIMI score 0-1
No ischemic ECG
changes
Troponin (0, 2 h)Age
Risk factorsPrevious AMI or CAD
Troponin (0, 2 h)History
ECGhs-cTn (0, 1 or 2 h)Age
HR, SBPSerum Cr
Cardiac arrest
ECG
Cardiac biomarker
Killip class
Risk thresholds:
nLow riskHEART score <3
Neg 0, 3-h cTn
Neg 0, 2-h hs-cTnEDACS score <16
Neg 0, 2 h hs-cTn
No ischemic ECG DTIMI score 0 (or <1
for mADAPT)
nNeg 0, 2-hcTn or hs-cTn
nNo ischemic
ECGDAge<50 y
<3 risk factors
Previous AMI or CAD
Neg cTn or hs-cTn
(0, 2 h)nInitial hs-cTn is
“very low ”and Sx
onset >3ha g o
Or
nInitial hs-cTn “low”
and 1 –or 2-h hs-
cTnDis“low”Chest pain free,
GRACE <140
nSx<6h-h s - c T n
<ULN (0, 3 h)
nSx>6h-h s - c T n
<ULN (arrival)
nIntermediate
riskHEART score 4-6 NA TIMI score 2-4 NA nInitial hs-cTn is
between “low”and
“high ”
And/Or
n1- or 2-h hs-cTn D
is between low andhigh thresholdsnT0 hs-cTn ¼12–
52 ng/L or
n1-hD¼
3–5n g / L
nHigh riskHEART score 7-10
(48,49)NA TIMI score 5-7 ( 49)N A nInitial hs-cTn is
“high ”
Or
n1- or 2-h hs-cTn D
is highnT0 hs-cTn >52
ng/L
Or
nD1h>5n g / L
Performance [ED discharges by 21%
(40% versus 18%)
Y30-d objective testing
by 12% (69% versus57%)
Ylength of stay by 12 h
(9.9 versus 21.9 h)More patients identi ﬁed as
low risk versus ADAPT
(42% versus 31%)ADAPT: More
discharged #6h
(19% versus 11%)30-d MACE
sensitivity ¼100%
28% eligible for ED
dischargeAMI sensitivity >99%
62% Ruled out
(0.2% 30-d MACE)
25% Observe13% Rule inAMI sensitivity >99%
30-d MACE not
studied
AMI sensitivity, % 100 100 100 100 >99 96.7
cTn accuracy:
30-d MACEsensitivity, %100 100 100 100 NA NA
hs-cTn accuracy:
30-d MACE
sensitivity, %95 92 93 99 99 –
ED discharge, % 40 49 19 (ADAPT)
39 (mADAPT)28 ––
*The terms “very low, ”“low, ”“high, ”“1hD,”and “2hD”refer to hs-cTn assay-speci ﬁc thresholds published in the ESC guideline ( 46,47).
ACS indicates acute coronary syndrome; ADAPT, Accelerated Diagnostic protocol to Assess chest Pain using Troponins; AMI, acute myocardial infarct ion; CP, chest pain or equivalent;
Cr, creatinine; cTn, cardiac troponin; hs-cTn, high-sensitivity cardiac troponin; ECG, electrocardiogram; ED, emergency department; EDACS, eme rgency department ACS; ESC, European Society of
Cardiology; GRACE, Global Registry of Acute Coronary Events; HEART, history, ECG, age, risk factors, troponin; HR, heart rate; hs, high sensitivity ; MACE, major adverse cardiovascular events;
mADAPT, modi ﬁed (including TIMI scores of 1) ADAPT; NA, not applicable; neg, negative; NICE, National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence; NOTR, No Objec tive Testing Rule; SBP, systolic
blood pressure; SSACS, symptoms suggestive of ACS; Sx, symptoms; and ULN, upper limit of normal.Gulati et al . JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
2021 Chest Pain Guideline NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285e214

CDP should be based on assay-speci ﬁcp e r f o r m a n c e
thresholds ( 4,5). CDPs are more likely to be successful
when they incorporate multidisciplinary teams.
2. There are important differences in the performance of
highly sensitive and conventional cTn assays. hs-cTn
assays may be used to guide disposition by repeat
s a m p l i n ga t1 ,2 ,o r3h o u r sf r o mE Da r r i v a lu s i n gt h epattern of rise or fall (i.e., delta) and the repeat valueitself, based on assay-speci ﬁcd i a g n o s t i ct h r e s h o l d s
(37-43 ). When using conventional cTn assays, the
sampling timeframe is extended to 3 to 6 hours fromED arrival ( 36).
3. CDPs that include risk scores all perform well
overall, with 99% to 100% sensitivity for index-
visit AMI and 30-day MACE and have been shownto decrease advanced testing to varying degreesa n ds h o u l db eu s e dp a r t i c u l a r l yw i t hc o n v e n t i o n a lcTn ( 2,13,30-35 ). However, because sex-speci ﬁc
considerations are not included in all scoring sys-tems, their effectiveness in men and women maynot be equal ( 51).
4. Previous test results should always be considered in
the evaluation of patients with acute chest pain onceACS has been ruled out. In those with recent cardiactesting and normal ﬁn d i n g sw h od on o th a v e
biomarker evidence of acute myocardial injury, furthertesting is of limited value, provided that adequate ex-ercise levels were achieved or pharmacologic stresswas performed, imaging was of suf ﬁcient quality, and
there are no changes in symptom frequency or stability
at the new visit. The “warranty ”intervals ( Table 7 )f o r
the various cardiac testing modalities differ because ofthe low number of incident events among patients witha normal CCTA, although patients with normal stresstesting may still have signi ﬁcant plaque and a higher
event rate ( 20-22 ). The warranty period for a normal
stress-rest SPECT is highly variable because it is pri-
marily determined by the type of stress, the patient ’s
clinical characteristics, and left ventricular ejection
fraction ( 52).
5. To use cTn properly, an understanding of the assay
used (high sensitivity or co nventional) and the timing
of chest pain onset relative to ED arrival is critical(17,38,39). CDPs that emphasize rapid rule-out based
on single hs-cTn concentrations below the limit ofdetection should be limited to patients whose symp-toms started at least 3 hours before ED arrival
(2,5,6,11,14,16,25,40-43 ,53-55 ). Unlike high-sensitivity
assays, clinical decision-making based on single mea-surement of conventional cTn has not been validated(36). If the clinical presentation is still suspicious for
ACS or diagnostic uncertainty remains after serial cTnmeasurement, it may be reasonable to repeat cTnassay later (i.e., beyond 3 hours for high-sensitivityand beyond 6 hours for conventional assays)
(
23,40,41).
4.1.1. Low-Risk Patients With Acute Chest Pain
SynopsisTABLE 7 Warranty Period for Prior Cardiac Testing
Test Modality Result Warranty Period
Anatomic Normal coronary angiogram
CCTA with no stenosis or plaque2y
Stress testing Normal stress test (given adequate stress) 1 y
Table 8 provides a de ﬁnition used for low-risk chest pain patients.
CCTA indicates coronary computed tomographic angiography.
Recommendations for Low-Risk Patients With Acute Chest Pain
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplements 10 and 11 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. Patients with acute chest pain and a 30-day risk of death or MACE <1% should be designated as low risk
(1-11).
2a B-R2. In patients with acute chest pain and suspected ACS who are deemed low-risk ( <1% 30-day risk of death
or MACE), it is reasonable to discharge home w ithout admission or urgent cardiac testing ( 12-16 ).JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021 Gulati et al .
NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285 2021 Chest Pain Guidelinee215

Low-risk patients are those with symptoms suggestive
of ACS and whose probability of MACE within 30 daysis#1% (17). This estimate is based on clinical information
that is readily available during the course of evaluation,
typically occurring in the E D. There are several methods
to determine that a patient is low risk ( Table 8 )b u t ,
invariably, all involve taking an appropriate history andphysical examination, demonstration that the ECG isnormal, nonischemic, or unchanged from the previousE C G ,a n dc T nm e a s u r e m e n ta tas i n g l ep o i n ti nt i m e( i fpresentation is >3 hours from symptom onset and using a
high-sensitivity assay) or serially ( 1-11)( w i t hi n c o r p o r a -
tion of a chest pain risk score into the CDP if using aconventional cTn assay). Importantly, there is no evi-dence to support routine admis sion or cardiac testing for
chest pain patients who are low risk, although outpatientCAC scanning can provide additional information forlonger-term risk strati ﬁcation.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. A large proportion of patients presenting to the ED with
chest pain are low risk based on a combination of fea-tures, including clinical stability, medical history,
nonischemic ECG, and absence of acute myocardial
injury on cTn measurement. Such individuals havea<1% frequency of ACS or MACE at 30 days ( 1-11).
Although achieving this with conventional cTn assaysrequires incorporation of risk scores into a CPD, hs-cTnresults can be used on their own. This approach hasbeen validated based on 15 studies including a total of>9,600 patients, with a demonstrated negative pre-
d i c t i v ev a l u ef o rM Io rd e a t ha t3 0d a y so f9 9 . 8 %( 11).
These ﬁndings re ﬂect studies involving both hs-cTnI
and hs-cTnT using serial measurement algorithms oras i n g l eh s - c T n ,p r o v i d e dt h e ﬁnal measurement isperformed $3 hours after the onset of symptoms,
without incorporation of risk scores.
2. For this low-risk subset of ED patients who have chest
pain, there is no evidence that stress testing or cardiac
imaging within 30 days of the index ED visit improvestheir outcomes ( 18). This represents a change from
previous guidelines where stress testing within 72hours was broadly recommended for patients withacute chest pain ( 19). However, many of these patients
have baseline cardiac risk factors that need to bemanaged. Pathways to facilitate outpatient follow-up
for further evaluation and guideline-directed manage-
ment of cardiac risk factors should be considered.Among patients presenting to the ED with chest pain,t h e r ei sas e p a r a t eg r o u pt h a ti sa ts u c hl o wr i s ko fhaving atherosclerotic plaque or 30-day MACE thatthey do not even need CDP-based risk strati ﬁcation.
4.1.1.1. Cost-Value Considerations in the Evaluation of
Low-Risk Patients
The costs associated with the acute evaluation of chest
pain have been examined within systematic reviews,
health technology appraisals, and data collected in theo b s e r v a t i o n a lo rr a n d o m i z e dc l i n i c a lt r i a ls e t t i n g( 1-10).
The decision analytic models suggest that the use of hs-Tncan be cost effective as a rule-out for ACS, primarilyattributable to prompt discharge of patients without hs-Tnelevations ( 2,8,11,12). Moreover, hs-Tn –guided diagnostic
strategies also reduced the use of stress testing by nearly
one-third ( 13). From a large multicenter registry, the
reduced time to discharge and use of noninvasive testingcontributed to a cost savings of 20% ( 13). Nonadherence to
management recommendations impact the potential forcost savings ( 5). From a randomized trial applying the
HEART Pathway, a modest 30-day cost savings of $216 perTABLE 8 Deﬁnition Used for Low-Risk Patients With Chest Pain
Low Risk ( <1% 30-d Risk for Death or MACE)
hs-cTn Based
T-0 T-0 hs-cTn below the assay limit of detection or “very low ”threshold if symptoms present for at least 3 h
T-0 and 1- or 2-h Delta T-0 hs-cTn and 1- or 2-h delta are both below the assay “low”thresholds ( >99% NPV for 30-d MACE)
Clinical Decision Pathway Based
HEART Pathway ( 20) HEART score #3, initial and serial cTn/hs-cTn <assay 99th percentile
EDACS ( 14) EDACS score #16; initial and serial cTn/hs-cTn <assay 99th percentile
ADAPT ( 21) TIMI score 0, initial and serial cTn/hs-cTn <assay 99th percentile
mADAPT TIMI score 0/1, initial and serial cTn/hs-cTn <assay 99th percentile
NOTR ( 15) 0 factors
ADAPT indicates 2-hour Accelerated Diagnostic Protocol to Access Patients with Chest Pain Symptoms Using Contemporary Troponins as the Only Biomar kers; cTn, cardiac troponin;
EDACS, Emergency Department Acute Coronary Syndrome; HEART Pathway, History, ECG, Age, Risk Factors, Troponin; hs-cTn, high-sensitivity cardiac troponin; MACE, major adverse
cardiovascular events; mADAPT, modi ﬁed 2-hour Accelerated Diagnostic Protocol to Access Patients with Chest Pain Symptoms Using Contemporary Troponins as the Only Biomarkers;
NOTR, No Objective Testing Rule; NPV, negative predictive value; and TIMI, Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction.Gulati et al . JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
2021 Chest Pain Guideline NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285e216

patient (p ¼0.04) was observed ( 6). However, the overall
reductions in hospital admission and length of stayimpacted population estimates for cost savings from 1 EDregistry of 30,769 patients presenting before and 23,699patients presenting after i mplementation of an acceler-
ated diagnostic pathway and resulted in a total costreduction of $13.5 million (Australian) ( 7). Thus, improved
process ef ﬁciency and discharge of low-risk patients
largely results in overall cost reductions.
4.1.2. Intermediate-Risk Patients With Acute Chest Pain
Recommendations for Intermediate-Risk Patients With Acute Chest Pain
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplements 12 and 13 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 C-EO1. For intermediate-risk patients with acute chest pain, TTE is recommended as a rapid, bedside test to
establish baseline ventricular and valvular functi on, evaluate for wall motion abnormalities, and to assess
for pericardial effusion.
2a A2. For intermediate-risk patients with acute chest pa in, management in an observation unit is reasonable to
s h o r t e nl e n g t ho fs t a ya n dl o w e rc o s tr e l a t i v et oa ni n p a t i e n ta d m i s s i o n( 1-7).
Synopsis
Patients in the ED without high-risk features and not
classi ﬁed as low risk by a CDP fall into an intermediate-
risk group. Intermediate-r isk patients do not have evi-
dence of acute myocardial injury by troponin but remaincandidates for additional cardiac testing. Some may have
chronic or minor troponin elevations. This testing often
requires more time than is appropriate for an ED visit.These patients may be placed in an inpatient bed ormanaged in a dedicated observation unit using a chestpain protocol.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Prompt use of TTE allows for an evaluation of cardiac
cause for symptoms and evaluation of alternative pathol-
ogies for acute chest pain ( 8-13). Rapid echocardiographicassessment may facilitate imaging of patients while they
are symptomatic. Point-of-care echocardiograms per-formed at the bedside by properly trained clinicians andtechnicians may be particularly useful.
2. The additional testing needed for intermediate-risk patients
often requires more time than is appropriate for an ED visitand is often performed under “observation ”outpatient sta-
tus. These patients may be placed in an inpatient bed ormanaged in a dedicated observation unit. Relative to care in
an inpatient bed, dedicated observation units have been
shown to decrease hospital admissions, length of stay, andcost while improving inpatient bed availability and chestpain patient satisfaction ( 1-7).
4.1.2.1. Intermediate-Risk Patients With Acute Chest Pain and
No Known (CAD)
Recommendations for Intermediate-Risk Patients With No Known CAD
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplements 14 and 15 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
Index Diagnostic Testing
Anatomic Testing
1A1. For intermediate-risk patients with acute chest pain and no known CAD eligible for diagnostic testing
after a negative or inconclusive eva luation for ACS, CCTA is useful for exclusion of atherosclerotic plaque
and obstructive CAD ( 1-11).
1 C-EO2. For intermediate-risk patients with acute chest pain, moderate-severe ischemia on current or prior ( £1
year) stress testing, and no known CAD establishe d by prior anatomic testing, ICA is recommended.
2a C-LD3. For intermediate-risk patients with acute chest pain with evidence of previous mildly abnormal stress test
results ( £1 year), CCTA is reasonable for diagnosing obstructive CAD ( 12,13).JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021 Gulati et al .
NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285 2021 Chest Pain Guidelinee217

Synopsis
For patients with recent prior testing and normal ﬁnd-
ings, no further testing is ind icated, given adequate exer-
cise levels were achieved or pharmacologic stress was
performed and if imaging was of suf ﬁcient quality, pro-
vided there are no changes in symptom frequency or sta-bility at the new visit. The intervals (1 year for stresstesting, 2 years for CCTA without plaque or stenosis) differbecause of a lack of CAD progression and the low number ofincident events among patients with a normal CCTA,although patients with normal stress testing may still havesigni ﬁcant plaque and a higher event rate ( 44-46 ). With a
previously inconclusive or mildly abnormal stress test in
the past year, CCTA is recommended, avoiding the poten-tial for inconclusive results if the same type of test isrepeated and enabling a more de ﬁnitive rule-out of
obstructive CAD. Among patients who present with acutechest pain who have had moderate-severe abnormalitieson previous testing, but no interval anatomic testing,direct referral to ICA may be helpful for diagnosis of
obstructive CAD.
Among those without a previous diagnostic evaluation
and no known CAD, CCTA or stress testing may be theinitial method of testing. S econd-line testing may be
helpful for patients with an initial inconclusive stress test.Similarly, for intermediate- risk patients with an inter-
mediate stenosis on CCTA, FFR-CT, or stress testing mayalso be indicated.
ICA is indicated for patients categorized as high risk on
a validated risk score ( Figure 9 ). However, patients with
an intermediate-risk score may also be candidates forCCTA or ICA if moderate-severe ischemia or signi ﬁcant
left ventricular dysfunction is detected on index diag-nostic testing.
Although there are several acceptable testing modal-
ities for intermediate-risk patients with acute chest pain,the decision to use one versus another should be guided
by local expertise and availability.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
Anatomic Testing
1. In the ED evaluation of patients with acute chest pain, CCTA
contributes to a reduced time to diagnosis and promptdischarge, without impacting safety (i.e., no difference indeath, repeat ED visits, or ACS over 1 to 6 months of follow-up) compared with a standard evaluation including stresstesting ( 1-4,8,47-50 ). Long-term prognostic data are limited,
but the CATCH (Cardiac CT in the Treatment of Acute Chest
Pain) trial showed a relative hazard for CAD events at w18
months of 0.62 (95% CI: 0.40 –0.98; p ¼0.04) for CCTA versus
a standard care strategy ( 48). Similar 40-month MACE rates
were reported in the PROSPECT (Providing Regional Ob-servations to Study Predictors of Events in the CoronaryTree) trial comparing CCTA- versus MPI-directed strategies(p¼0.29) ( 10). Similar 2-year outcomes were also reported for
stress echocardiography and CCTA (p ¼0.47) ( 29).
2. In patients who have evidence of moderate or severe
ischemia on previous stress testing, who were notrevascularized, and who present with acute chest pain,additional noninvasive str ess testing is unlikely to
result in any change in management. Such patients areassumed to have signi ﬁcant ﬂow-limiting CAD and can
proceed directly to an invasive evaluation if coronaryrevascularization is consistent with the goals of care. A
sizeable proportion of patients with moderate-severe
ischemia do not undergo ICA ( 51,52) and may require
additional assessment, if repeat symptoms occur.
3. Symptomatic patients with inconclusive or mildly
abnormal stress tests often have an increased risk ofMACE ( 53). Patients with previous stress testing often
have atherosclerotic plaque and are at risk forobstructive CAD lesions ( 12,13).Stress Testing
1 B-NR4. For intermediate-risk patients with acute che s tp a i na n dn ok n o w nC A Dw h oa r ee l i g i b l ef o rc a r d i a c
testing, either exercise ECG, stress echocardiography, stress PET/SPECT MPI, or stress CMR is useful forthe diagnosis of myocardial ischemia ( 1,4,10,14-36 ).
Sequential or Add-on Diagnostic Testing
2a B-NR5. For intermediate-risk patients with acute chest pa i na n dn ok n o w nC A D ,w i t hac o ronary artery stenosis of
40% to 90% in a proximal or middle coronary artery o n CCTA, FFR-CT can be useful for the diagnosis of
vessel-speci ﬁc ischemia and to guide decision-making rega rding the use of coronary revascularization
(37-43 ).
2a C-EO6. For intermediate-risk patients with acute chest pain and no known CAD, as well as an inconclusive prior
stress test, CCTA can be useful for excluding the prese nce of atherosclerotic plaque and obstructive CAD.
2a C-EO7. For intermediate-risk patients with acute chest pa in and no known CAD, with an inconclusive CCTA, stress
imaging (with echocardiography, PET/SPECT MPI, or C MR) can be useful for the diagnosis of myocardial
ischemia.(Continued)Gulati et al . JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
2021 Chest Pain Guideline NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285e218

FIGURE 9 Evaluation Algorithm for Patients With Suspected ACS at Intermediate Risk With No Known CAD
Test choice should be guided by local availability and expertise. *Recent negative test: normal CCTA #2 years (no plaque/no stenosis) OR negative stress test #1 year,
given adequate stress. †High-risk CAD means left main stenosis $50%; anatomically signi ﬁcant 3-vessel disease ( $70% stenosis). ‡For FFR-CT, turnaround times may
impact prompt clinical care decisions. However, the use of FFR-CT does not require additional testing, as would be the case when adding stress testing . CAD indicates
coronary artery disease; CCTA, coronary CT angiography; CMR, cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging; CT, computed tomography; FFR-CT, fracti onalﬂow reserve
with CT; GDMT, guideline-directed medical therapy; ICA, invasive coronary angiography; INOCA, ischemia and no obstructive coronary artery diseas e; PET, positron
emission tomography; and SPECT, single-photon emission CT.
Stress Testing
4. Among patients evaluated in the ED who need further
testing, exercise ECG is safe with most patients havingnegative studies and a low risk of ACS ( 1,4,10,14-31 ,54).
Stress echocardiography is sa fe and effective for triage
and prompt discharge of patients and is associated with
few events among those with normal or low-risk ﬁndings
over near-term follow-up of up to 6 months ( 17,18,36).
Prompt stress echocardiogr aphy resulted in a reduction
in ED and hospital length of stay, compared with CCTA,with similar 2-year MACE rates (p ¼0.47) ( 29). In the ED
evaluation of patients with acute chest pain, a nuclearMPI strategy is similarly safe when compared with CCTAwith no difference in MACE (death, ACS, or stroke) over
follow-up of 6 to 12 months. Longer-term follow-up data
from the PROSPECT trial ( 10) supported that at w3.5
years, the rate of MACE was similar between MPI andCCTA (p ¼0.29) ( 10) .C o m p a r e dw i t hC C T A ,u s eo fs t r e s s
MPI delayed the time to diagnosis by >50% ( 1,4).
Furthermore, recent observation from 213 patientsreferred for rest-stress MPI with mildly abnormal hs-cTn
values reported no adverse events related to the testsand a modest 13.6% yield for ischemic studies ( 55).
Single-center, small (n ¼105) randomized trial evidence
suggests that stress CMR is safe without a near-term (90-
day) increase in hospital readmission or additional
testing ( 32-34 ). From a single-center registry (n ¼135),
stress CMR was associated with a high sensitivity (100%)and speci ﬁcity (93%) for the detection of obstructive CAD
or cardiovascular events at 1 year ( 35).
Sequential or Add-on Testing
5. Patients with coronary artery stenosis of 40% to 90% in a
proximal or middle coronary segment on CCTA maybene ﬁt from measurement of FFR-CT ( 37-43 ). In a large
registry of 555 patients, the addition of FFR-CT was safe
with no difference in 90-day MACE compared with CCTAalone ( 42). No deaths or MI occurred among patients with
a negative FFR-CT when revas cularization was deferred.
6. CCTA is highly effective at ruling out the presence of
plaque or stenosis and may help to clarify riskJACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021 Gulati et al .
NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285 2021 Chest Pain Guidelinee219

assessment and subsequent management decisions in
patients with no known CAD who have inconclusivestress test results.
7. Patients with acute chest pain who have indeterminate
stenosis on CCTA may bene ﬁt from having a stress test with
imaging to evaluate for myocardial ischemia ( 37-43 ).
4.1.2.1.1. Cost-Value Considerations
Economic evaluations have explored the value of stress
echocardiography, CCTA, an d stress nuclear imaging.
Several observational series report that prompt stressechocardiography in the ED for the evaluation of acutechest pain is associated with signi ﬁcantly lower costs,
with no adverse sequelae after early discharge ( 1,2). In a
single-center randomized trial of 400 patients, prompt
stress echocardiography was associated with a reduced
rate of hospitalization (p ¼0.026) and length of stay in theED (p <0.0001) ( 3). The CT-STAT (Systematic Triage of
Acute Chest Pain Patients to Treatment) trial reported onthe use of CCTA (n ¼361 patients) compared with stress
MPI (n ¼338 patients) in the acute evaluation of chest pain
in the ED ( 4) .I nt h eC T - S T A Tt r i a l ,t h et i m et od i a g n o s i s
was 2.9 hours in the CCTA arm and 6.2 hours in the stress
MPI arm (p <0.0001). Accordingly, median adjusted ED
charges were nearly 40% lower for CCTA, compared withstress MPI ($2,137 for CCTA versus $3,458 for stress MPI;p<0.001). Overall, CCTA resulted in improved ef ﬁciency
with a reduction in length of stay and prompt discharge(5,6), resulting in cost savings from 15% to 38% when
c o m p a r e dw i t hs t a n d a r dc a r es t r a t e g i e s( 4,7)a n da
weighted cost savings of $680 ( 8).
4.1.2.2. Intermediate-Risk Patients With Acute Chest Pain and
Known CAD
Recommendations for Intermediate-Risk Patients With Acute Chest Pain and Known CAD
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplements 16 and 17 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1A1. For intermediate-risk patients with acute chest pain who have known CAD and present with new onset or
worsening symptoms, GDMT should be optimized bef ore additional cardiac testing is performed ( 1,2).
1A2. For intermediate-risk patients with acute chest pain who have worsening frequency of symptoms with
signiﬁcant left main, proximal left anterior descendin g stenosis, or multivessel CAD on prior anatomic
testing or history of prior coronary revascularization, ICA is recommended ( 3-8).
2a B-NR3. For intermediate-risk patients with acute chest pain and known nonobstructive CAD, CCTA can be useful
to determine progression of atherosc lerotic plaque and obstructive CAD ( 9-11).
2a B-NR4. For intermediate-risk patients with acute chest pain and coronary artery stenosis of 40% to 90% in a
proximal or middle segment on CCTA, FFR-CT is reasonable for diagnosis of vessel-speci ﬁc ischemia and
to guide decision-making regarding t he use of coronary revascularization ( 12-17 ).
2a B-NR5. For intermediate-risk patients with acute che st pain and known CAD who have new onset or worsening
symptoms, stress imaging (PET/SPECT MPI, CMR, or stress echocardiography) is reasonable ( 18-21 ).
Synopsis
Figure 10 includes the evaluation algorithm for patients
with known CAD, including patients with nonobstructiveand obstructive CAD. In patents with known non-obstructive CAD (i.e., a luminal stenosis 1% to 49% onCCTA or ICA or calci ﬁed plaque on chest CT), repeat CCTA
is recommended unless there is a large enough plaqueburden where ischemia is suspected. The use of FFR-CT
may be helpful to guide clin ical decision-making
regarding the use of coron ary revascularization ( 16). For
all other patients with known CAD, stress testing is rec-ommended to guide decisio ns on optimizing medical
management and revascularization.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. As shown in many secondary prevention trials, such as
the Veterans Affairs Non-Q-Wave myocardial infarction(VANQUISH), COURAGE and ISCHEMIA, GDMT should
be assessed in all patients with known CAD and opti-mized when symptomatic ( 2,22,23).
2. ICA is an effective means for diagnosing obstructive
CAD and guiding the use of coronary revascularization.For the intermediate-risk patients with a previous his-tory of CAD, ICA is reasonable for patients presentingwith frequent weekly or daily symptoms or for those
already on GDMT as well as those with high-risk CAD
(left main or proximal left anterior descending or mul-tivessel CAD).
3. For patients with previous anatomic testing that
revealed nonobstructive CAD, CCTA has been shown toeffectively document progressive CAD, including moreextensive atherosclerotic plaque or the presence ofhigh-risk plaque features or new obstructive
stenosis $50% ( 9-11,24). Patients in this category alsoGulati et al . JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
2021 Chest Pain Guideline NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285e220

include those patients with a previous CAC scan (or
those for whom coronary artery calci ﬁcation was noted
as an incidental ﬁnding on chest CT) who present to an
ED for evaluation of chest pain where concern existswith regard to the extent of noncalci ﬁed plaque and
potential for underlying obstructive stenosis. Howev-er, for patients with extensive plaque, a stress test is
preferred.
4. Patients with acute chest pain who have coronary ar-
tery stenosis from 40% to 90% on CCTA may bene ﬁt
from measurement of FFR-CT, especially when thestenosis is proximal or mid-coronary artery ( 12-17 ,25).
From 1 large clinical registry, the deferral of coronaryrevascularization with a normal FFR-CT was safe, withn od i f f e r e n c ei nM A C Ea t9 0d a y s( 16).
5. Most randomized trials that examined the role of
stress testing in the ED enrolled patients with noknown CAD, with few including patients with
obstructive CAD (range: 7% –15%) ( 18-20 ). Despite
this, assessing the functional signi ﬁcance of
obstructive CAD is an important part of ischemia-guided management ( 26).FIGURE 10 Evaluation Algorithm for Patients With Suspected ACS at Intermediate Risk With Known CAD
Test choice should be guided by local availability and expertise. *Known CAD is prior MI, revascularization, known obstructive or nonobstructive CA D on invasive or
CCTA. †If extensive plaque is present a high-quality CCTA is unlikely to be achieved, and stress testing is preferred ‡Obstructive CAD includes prior coronary artery
bypass graft/percutaneous coronary intervention. §High-risk CAD means left main stenosis $50%; anatomically signi ﬁcant 3-vessel disease ( $70% stenosis). kFFR-CT
turnaround times may impact prompt clinical care decisions. ACS indicates acute coronary syndrome; CAD, coronary artery disease; CCTA, coronary CT angiography;
CMR, cardiovascular magnetic resonance; CT, computed tomography; FFR-CT, fractional ﬂow reserve with CT; GDMT, guideline-directed medical therapy; ICA, invasive
coronary angiography; INOCA, ischemia and no obstructive coronary artery disease; PET, positron emission tomography; and SPECT, single-photon em ission CT.JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021 Gulati et al .
NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285 2021 Chest Pain Guidelinee221

4.1.3. High-Risk Patients With Acute Chest Pain
Synopsis
Patients with symptoms suggestive of ACS who are at
high risk of short-term MACE include those with newischemic changes on the ECG, troponin-con ﬁrmed acute
myocardial injury, new-onset left ventricular systolicdysfunction (ejection fraction <40%), newly diagnosed
moderate-severe ischemia on stress imaging, and/or ahigh risk score on CDP ( 4,13,14). ICA is indicated for pa-
tients with con ﬁrmed ACS based on a robust body of
randomized trial evidence and clinical practice guideline
indications ( 4-7). In the patients with a negative initial
evaluation, ICA is also indicated for those categorized ashigh risk on a validated risk strati ﬁcation instrument.
For high-risk patients with a documented AMI on the
index ED evaluation and who demonstrate on CCTA orICA normal or nonobstructive CAD, CMR and echocardi-ography are useful for examining alternative causes for
symptoms such as nonischemic cardiomyopathy or
myocarditis ( 8-11).
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Patients with acute chest pain and suspected ACS are
considered at high risk for short-term MACE if theyhave new ischemic changes on electrocardiography,troponin-con ﬁrmed acute myocardial injury, new-
onset left ventricular systolic dysfunction (ejection
fraction <40%), newly diagnosed moderate-severe
ischemia on stress testing, hemodynamic instability,and/or a high CDP risk score. Risk scores are recom-mended in guidelines to facilitate the management ofpatients who present with ACS ( 3,15,16).
2. Among patients categorized as high risk, ICA
provides a comprehensive assessment of the extent
and severity of obstructive CAD. Moreover, the
determination of the severity of anatomic CAD iscritical to guide the use of coronary revascularization(6).
3. Approximately 6% to 15% of troponin-positive ACS
occurs in the absence of obstructive CAD ( 17,18).
Additional testing may be helpful to identify the causethat may alter an ensuing therapeutic strategy ( 19).
Evidence supports that CMR can identify wall motion
abnormalities and myocardial edema and distinguishinfarct-related scar from non-CAD causes such asmyocarditis and nonischemic cardiomyopathy. Whenperformed within 2 weeks of ACS, CMR can be useful toidentify MI with nonobstructive CAD (MINOCA) fromother causes ( 8-11).Recommendations for High-Risk Patients With Acute Chest Pain
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplements 18 and 19 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
Recommendations for High-Risk Patients, Including Those With High-Risk Findings on CCTA or Stress Testing
1 B-NR1. For patients with acute chest pain and suspected ACS who have new ischemic changes on electrocardi-
ography, troponin-con ﬁrmed acute myocardial injury, new-onset left ventricular systolic dysfunction
(ejection fraction <40%), newly diagnosed moderate-severe ischemia on stress testing, hemodynamic
instability, and/or a high clinical decision pathway (CDP) risk score should be de signated as high risk for
short-term MACE ( 1-3).
1 C-EO2. For patients with acute chest pain and suspected ACS who are designated as high risk, ICA is recom-
mended ( 4-7).
2a B-NR3. For high-risk patients with acute chest pain who a re troponin positive in whom obstructive CAD has been
excluded by CCTA or ICA, CMR or echocardiography can b ee f f e c t i v ei ne s t a b l i s h i n ga l t e r n a t i v ed i a g n o s e s
(8-12 ).Gulati et al . JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
2021 Chest Pain Guideline NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285e222

4.1.4. Acute Chest Pain in Patients With Prior Coronary Artery
Bypass Graft (CABG) Surgery
Synopsis
There are many potential causes of acute chest pain
in the months after CABG. M usculoskeletal pain from
sternotomy remains the most common. However, othercauses such as myocardial ischemia from acute graftstenosis or occlusion ( 1,2), pericarditis, PE, sternal
wound infection, or nonunion should also be consid-ered. Post-sternotomy pain syndrome is de ﬁned as
discomfort after thoracic surgery, persisting for at least
2 months, and without apparent cause ( 15). The inci-
dence of post-sternotomy pain syndrome has beenfound to be as low as 7% and as high as 66% ( 16-19 ),
with a higher prevalence in women compared with menwithin the ﬁrst 3 months of thoracic surgery (51.4%
versus 31.3%; p <0.01) but, after 3 months, postoperative
sex difference in prevalence was not seen ( 20). Graft
failure within the ﬁrst year post-CABG using saphenous
venous grafts is usually a result of technical issues,intimal hyperplasia, or thrombosis ( 5). Internal mam-
mary artery graft failure within the ﬁrst-year post-CABG
is most commonly attributable to issues with the anas-tomotic site of the graft.
Reasons for acute chest pain several years after CABG
include either graft stenosis or occlusion or progression of
disease in a non-bypassed vessel. One year after CABG,
w10% to 20% of saphenous vein grafts fail, while by 10
years, only about half of saphenous vein grafts are patent(5). In contrast, the internal mammary artery has patency
rates of 90% to 95% 10 to 15 years after CABG ( 6).
Compared with the use of saphenous vein grafts, the useof radial artery grafts for CABG also resulted in a higherrate of patency at 5 years of follow-up ( 7). In addition,
knowledge of the native coronary anatomy and type of
revascularization (complete o r incomplete) is useful for
interpretation of functional testing.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Acute chest pain in patients with prior CABG may be
caused by myocardial ischemia as a result of technicalerrors at the graft anastomo tic site, thrombosis within
the graft, graft intimal h yperplasia, or vasospasm
within arterial grafts. Pro gressive atherosclerosiswithin bypass grafts or the native coronary vessels may
also result in acute chest pain caused by myocardialischemia. Noninvasive stress imaging testing isreasonable in these patients as stress imaging willidentify ischemic myocardial territories that willfurther guide revascularization for patients who areamenable to and are candidat es for revascularization.
CCTA has a great degree of accuracy with a sensitivity
and speci ﬁcity of detecting complete graft occlusions,
99% and 99%, respectively, when compared with thestandard of ICA ( 21). Furthermore, CCTA was ideal in
assessing bypass grafts because of the large size ofthese vessels, decreased vessel calci ﬁcation, and
decreased motion of these vessels when compared withnative coronary vessels. Evaluation of bypass grafts hasbeen shown to be successful in 93% to 100% of patients
(21). In patients who have acute chest pain without
features of ACS, CCTA is especially useful for assessinggraft patency and is less robust for assessing nativecoronary vessel stenosis in this population ( 1-7).
2. There are clinical features and stress imaging test fea-
tures in patients with prior CABG presenting with acutechest pain with no ACS that may indicate a high like-lihood of severe ischemic heart disease such as new
resting left ventricular systolic dysfunction (left ven-
tricular ejection fraction <35%) not readily explained
by noncoronary causes, stress electrocardiographicﬁndings including 2 mm of ST-segment depression at
low workload or persisting into recovery, exercise-induced ST-segment elevati on, or exercise-induced
VT/ventricular ﬁ
brillation (VF), severe stress-induced
left ventricular systolic dysfunction, stress-induced
perfusion abnormalities involving $10% of the
myocardium, or stress-induced left ventricular dila-tion. In those with prior CABG with high-risk stressimaging features, referral for ICA is useful providedthat these patients are amenable to, and are candidatesfor, coronary revascularization ( 8-14 ). Patients with
prior CABG presenting with acute chest pain withoutt h ep r e s e n c eo fA C Sm a yh a v es t r e s si m a g i n gf e a t u r e s
that are equivocal or nondiagnostic for the presence of
myocardial ischemia. Equivocal or nondiagnostic stressRecommendations for Acute Chest Pain in Patients With Prior CABG Surgery
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 C-LD1. In patients with prior CABG surgery presenting with acute chest pain who do not have ACS, performing
stress imaging is effective to evaluate for myocardi al ischemia or CCTA for graft stenosis or occlusion ( 1-7).
1 C-LD2. In patients with prior CABG surgery presenting with acute chest pain, who do not have ACS ( 8-14 )o rw h o
have an indeterminate/nondiagnostic stress test, ICA is useful ( 8).JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021 Gulati et al .
NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285 2021 Chest Pain Guidelinee223

imaging may be as a result of patient ’s body habitus,
inadequate or suboptimal heart rate, arrhythmias suchas atrial ﬁbrillation, left bundle branch block, or patient
motion. In these patients, performing an ICA isreasonable when the angiographic ﬁndings have a high
likelihood of impacting therapeutic decisions ( 8).
4.1.5. Evaluation of Patients With Acute Chest Pain Receiving
Dialysis
Recommendation for Evaluation of Patients With Acute Chest Pain Receiving Dialysis
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized in Online Data Supplement 20 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
1 B-NR1. In patients who experience acute unremitting chest pain while undergoing dialysis, transfer by EMS to an
acute care setting is recommended ( 1-5).
Synopsis
In 2015, there were nearly 500,000 people in the United
States who received maintenance dialysis to treat end-stagerenal disease ( 1). Chest pain occurs during hemodialysis in
2% to 5% of patients ( 6,7). Causes are numerous and related to
the high prevalence of severe cardiovascular disease in thispopulation and the dialysis procedure itself. Causes includeAMI or ACS, pericarditis, PE, pleuritis, hemolysis, gastro-esophageal re ﬂux, subclavian steal, and musculoskeletal dis-
orders ( 7). Myocardial ischemia is the most frequent serious
cause and can be induced by hypotension ( 6,7) or tachyar-
rhythmias ( 2) occurring during dialysis in patients with CAD.
AMI in patients undergoing dialysis is less frequently associ-ated with chest pain than in patients who are not on dialysis,but warning signs may include diaphoresis or dyspnea ( 3).Unusual but serious causes of chest pain during dialysis are
embolism ( 6) and vessel perforation by catheter ( 4,5). When
indicated, cardiac testing for patients on dialysis should be thesame as those who are not on dialysis.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Because the risk of CAD is relatively high in patients
undergoing dialysis, when acute unremitting chest painoccurs during dialysis, a 12-lead ECG should be per-
formed and the patient should be urgently transferred
by EMS to an acute care setting for evaluation for cause
of symptoms and further clinical engagement ( 3).
4.1.6. Evaluation of Acute Chest Pain in Patients With Cocaine
and Methamphetamine Use
Recommendation for Evaluation of Acute Chest Pain in Patients With Cocaine and Methamphetamine Use
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized in Online Data Supplement 21 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
2a B-NR1. In patients presenting with acute chest pain, it is r easonable to consider cocaine and methamphetamine
use as a cause of their symptoms ( 1-3).
Synopsis
T h em o s tf r e q u e n tp r e s e n t i n gc o m p l a i n to fc o c a i n e
abuse is acute chest pain, resulting from $1o ft h ea l k a -
loid ’s many cardiovascular actions ( 1,4,5). Cocaine pro-
duces a hyperadrenergic state by blocking neuronalreuptake of norepinephrine and dopamine. The accumu-lation of these catecholamines increases heart rate andblood pressure, sometimes dramatically. These actionsand the drug ’s simultaneous effect of coronary vasocon-
striction and elevated myocardial oxygen demand can
produce myocardial ischemia and even infarction in theabsence of obstructive CAD. Additional hazardous actionsinclude increased myocardial contractility, cardiac ar-rhythmias, myocardial toxicity directly or throughaugmented adrenergic stimulation, increased plateletaggregability, endothelial dysfunction, and hypertensivevascular catastrophes (aortic dissection, cerebrovascular
hemorrhage) ( 4-6).
Methamphetamine has also been shown to lead to
myocardial ischemia from mechanisms similar to cocaine.Studies have shown that methamphetamine can result ind e c r e a s e dm y o c a r d i a lp e r f u s i o n .L i k ec o c a i n e ,m e t h a m -phetamine also may reduce coronary sinus blood ﬂow ( 7).
It has been reported that up to 70% of methamphetamineusers have an abnormal ECG, with the most common
ﬁnding being tachycardia ( 8). Additional abnormalities on
the ECG have been attributed to presence of hypertension,pulmonary artery hypertension, and cardiomyopathy, allof which have been associated with methamphetamineuse ( 9). General principles for risk strati ﬁcation of patients
with chest pain apply to patients with cocaine or meth-amphetamine use ( 4).Gulati et al . JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
2021 Chest Pain Guideline NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285e224

Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Cocaine and methamphetamine use can be considered
in young patients presenting with chest pain and evi-dence of ACS; the frequency of ACS is <10% among
cocaine and methamphetamine users in most studies,and death is rare ( 1-4). A person ’s urine typically testspositive for cocaine or methamphetamine within 1 to 4
hours of consuming the drug and will continue to testpositive for 2 to 4 days.
4.1.7. Shared Decision-Making in Patients With
Acute Chest Pain
Recommendations for Shared Decision-Making in Patients With Acute Chest Pain
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplement 22 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-R1. For patients with acute chest pain and suspected ACS who are deemed low risk by a CDP, patient decision
aids are bene ﬁcial to improve understanding and effect ively facilitate risk communication ( 1,2).
1 B-R2. For patients with acute chest pain and suspected ACS who are deemed intermediate risk by a CDP, shared
decision-making between the clinician and patient r egarding the need for admission, for observation,
discharge, or further evaluation i n an outpatient setting is recommended for improving patient under-
standing and reducing low-value testing ( 1,2).
Synopsis
Risk communication and shared decision-making using
a decision aid such as Chest Pain Choice have been shown
to increase patient knowledge, engagement, and satis-faction and decrease the rate of observation unit admis-sion and 30-day cardiac stress testing in both single-centerand multicenter randomized trials ( 1-3). For low-risk pa-
tients, decision aids can facilitate risk communication
between the clinician and the patient and increase pa-tients ’understanding of their risk and the importance of
outpatient follow-up after discharge from the ED. Forintermediate-risk patients, admission to an observationunit or discharge from the ED with further, timely evalu-ation in an outpatient setting is acceptable. Decision aidssuch as Chest Pain Choice can effectively facilitate shared
decision-making regarding the need for admission,
observation, or discharge for further evaluation in anoutpatient setting ( 3).
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Adult ED patients with acute chest pain who are
deemed low risk are frequent ly admitted for observa-
tion and cardiac stress testing or CCTA, resulting in
increased cost to the patient and the health care system
(2). Shared decision-making is the process by which
patients and clinicians share information and take stepsto build consensus about preferred tests and treat-ments. In shared decision-making, both parties shareinformation: the clinician offers options and describesthe potential harms and bene ﬁts, and the patient com-
municates his or her preferences. Patients are prepared
with a better understanding of the relevant factorsinﬂuencing the decision and share responsibility for
deciding how to proceed. Sha red decision-making rests
on the principles of patient centered care, includingrespect for patient autonomy (i.e., that a patient ’s
informed preferences should be the basis for medicalaction) ( 4). Decision aids are patient-centered tools
designed to facilitate shared decision-making between
a patient and the clinician such that patients ’values
and preferences are incorporated into health care de-cisions ( 5). Shared decision-making, however, can be
performed without a decision aid; lack of a decision aids h o u l dn o tp r e c l u d ea t t e m p t sa ts h a r e dd e c i s i o n -making.
2. In a single-center randomized trial of adults presenting
to the ED with a chief complaint of chest pain (n ¼204)
who were being considered by the treating clinician for
admission to the observation unit for cardiac stresstesting, patients randomized to shared decision-making facilitated by the Chest Pain Choice Decision
Aid (2,3) had greater knowledge, were more engaged
in the decision-making process, and less frequentlydecided to be admitted to the observation unit forstress testing (58% versus 77%, absolute difference
19%, 95% CI: 6%-31%) ( 2). There were no MACE after
discharge in either group. The decision aid was subse-quently tested in a population of 898 patients withgreater socioeconomic diversity recruited from 6 EDsacross the United States ( 1,6). Similar ﬁndings were
observed. Analysis of health care use in this trialshowed fewer cardiac imaging tests and lower overall45-day health care use in patients randomized to the
decision aid ( 7,8).JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021 Gulati et al .
NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285 2021 Chest Pain Guidelinee225

4.2. Evaluation of Acute Chest Pain With Nonischemic
Cardiac Pathologies
Synopsis
Alternative nonischemic causes for acute chest pain
should be considered if an ischemic cause is not suspectedbased on initial evaluation. Echocardiography, as aportable bedside noninvasive and almost universally
available tool, should be used to unmask some imminently
dangerous but potentially treatable cardiac conditions.
TTE is the primary tool to diagnose pericardial effu-
sions with and without tamponade, aortic dissections
(TTE and transesophageal echocardiography [TEE]), acuteright ventricular dysfunction in the setting of PE, as wellas mechanical complications of MI (ventricular septalrupture, free wall rupture, pa pillary muscle dysfunction
and rupture).
Echocardiography can also identify cardiac masses,
emboli, or clots in transit, intracardiac shunting, orendocarditis. Furthermore, beyond the anatomic ﬁnd-
ings, echocardiography can be used to noninvasivelyassess volume status, pulmonary hypertension, valvularstenosis, and regurgitation. Many of these entities maypresent with acute chest pain as well as shortness of
breath.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Prompt use of TTE allows for an evaluation of cardiac
cause for symptoms and evaluation of alternative pa-
thologies for acute chest pain ( 1-6). Rapid echocardio-
graphic assessment may facilitate imaging of thepatient while symptomatic.
4.2.1. Acute Chest Pain With Suspected
Acute Aortic SyndromeRecommendation for Evaluation of Acute Ches t Pain With Nonischemic Cardiac Pathologies
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
1 C-EO1. In patients with acute chest pain in whom other potentially life-thr eatening nonischemic cardiac condi-
tions are suspected (e.g., aortic pathology, pericar dial effusion, endocarditis), TTE is recommended for
diagnosis.
Recommendations for Acute Chest Pain With Suspected Acute Aortic Syndrome
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 C-EO1. In patients with acute chest pain where there is cl inical concern for aortic dissection, computed to-
mography angiography (CTA) of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis is recommended for diagnosis and
treatment planning.
1 C-EO2. In patients with acute chest pain where there is clin ical concern for aortic dissection, TEE or CMR should
be performed to make the diagnosis if CT is contraindicated or unavailable.
Synopsis
Acute aortic syndrome describes diseases involving
disruptions in the aortic wall, including aortic dissec-
tion, intramural hematoma, an d penetrating aortic ulcer
(1). The annual incidence is 2 to 4 cases/100,000, with
higher prevalence with gene tic conditions that weaken
the aortic wall ( 2). Prominent risk factors include hy-
pertension athero sclerosis and connective tissue dis-
ease. Cocaine use may provoke dissection even withoutother risk factors.
Acute onset of severe chest or back pain heralds acute
aortic dissection in 80% to 9 0% of patients, sometimes
characterized as ripping or tearing ( 3). Progression can
produce end-organ hypoperfusion, and proximal extensionmay cause tamponade, severe acute aortic regurgitation, orrarely, STEMI. Intramural hematomas, which differ fromdissection by absence of an identi ﬁable intimal ﬂap, have a
lesser understood natural history but are typically evalu-
ated and treated in a similar manner to dissections.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. A high index of suspicion in appropriate patients, and a
coordinated, multidisciplinary evaluation is needed tooptimize outcomes. The diagnostic modality of choicein stable patients is CTA, which is both highly sensitiveand speci ﬁc(4-6). Chest radiographs can show medi-
astinal widening but may be normal.
2. TTE can show pericardial effusion or aortic regurgita-
tion, and a dissection ﬂap can sometimes be visualized;
however, more complete imaging of the aortic archrequires TEE or CT. CMR is sensitive and speci ﬁc, but
CT is usually more expeditious.Gulati et al . JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
2021 Chest Pain Guideline NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285e226

4.2.2. Acute Chest Pain With Suspected PE
Synopsis
The incidence of PE is estimated at 65 cases per 100,000,
but some cases are asymptomatic and others undiagnosed(5,6). One-third of deaths are sudden, and 60% are
undiagnosed before death ( 7). Risk factors for PE are the
same for venous thromboembolism and include inherited
hypercoagulable states and acquired risk factors (recent
surgery, trauma, immobilization, malignancy, smoking,obesity, oral contraception). Recognition of PE can bechallenging because symptoms and clinical signs maybe nonspeci ﬁc. Dyspnea followed by chest pain, classically
pleuritic, is the most common presenting symptom ( 1).
Signs of deep venous thrombosis may be present onexamination ( 5).
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. CTA using PE protocol is the diagnostic modality of
choice in stable patients; ventilation-perfusion scan-ning is a second-line alternative in the acute setting(3,4). Use of clinical prediction rules to select patients
for imaging can decrease radiation exposure and cost(8). Troponin (and brain natriuretic peptide) can be
elevated, and echocardiogr aphy may reveal acute right
ventricular strain consequent to large PEs; troponinand brain natriuretic peptide are both markers forhigher mortality rate ( 2).
2. Recognition of PE is important because prompt anti-
coagulation improves outcomes ( 2). Clinical assessment
combined with pretest risk strati ﬁcation can help select
patients appropriate for diagnostic imaging. In theabsence of shock, diagnostic evaluation depends on theclinical assessment of pretest probability ( 3). Several
prediction rules are availabl e that add predictive value
to clinical assessment ( 4). D-dimers are highly sensitive
but not very speci ﬁc for the diagnosis of PE in ED pa-
tients. Measurement of D-dimers, using age- and sex-
speci ﬁc cutoffs, may be useful in patients at low to in-
termediate pretest probability; those with negative D-dimers can probably be discharged without furthertesting, whereas those with positive values should beconsidered for CTA ( 2).
4.2.3. Acute Chest Pain With Suspected MyopericarditisRecommendations for Acute Chest Pain With Suspected PE
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplement 23 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In stable patients with acute chest pain with high clinical suspicion for PE, CTA using a PE protocol is
recommended ( 1-4).
1 C-EO2. For patients with acute chest pain and possible PE, n eed for further testing s hould be guided by pretest
probability.
Recommendations for Acute Chest Pain With Suspected Myopericarditis
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplement 24 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In patients with acute chest pain and myocardia l injury who have nonobstructive coronary arteries on
anatomic testing, CMR with gadolinium contrast is effective to distinguish myopericarditis from other
causes, including myocardial infarction an d nonobstructive coronary arteries (MINOCA) ( 1-6).
1 B-NR2. In patients with acute chest pain with suspected acute myopericarditis, CMR is useful if there is diagnostic
uncertainty, or to determine the presence and extent of myocardial and pericardial in ﬂammation and
ﬁbrosis ( 7-12).
1 C-EO3. In patients with acute chest pain and suspected myopericarditis, TTE is effective to determine the
presence of ventricular wall motion abnormalities , pericardial effusion, valvular abnormalities, or
restrictive physiology.
2b C-LD4. In patients with acute chest pain with suspected acute pericarditis, noncontrast or contrast cardiac CT
scanning may be reasonable to determine the pre sence and degree of pericardial thickening ( 7,8,13).JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021 Gulati et al .
NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285 2021 Chest Pain Guidelinee227

Synopsis
Pericarditis and myocarditis share overlapping com-
mon causes and likely form a continuum ( 8). In patients
with pericarditis, a minimally elevated troponin does notappear to confer a worse prognosis ( 14). Most cases of
pericarditis in developed nations are viral, although
tuberculosis is sometimes a consideration.
Pericarditis classically presents with chest pain that is
sharp, pleuritic, and which may be improved by sitting upor leaning forward, although in many instances suchﬁndings are not present. A pericardial friction rub may be
audible. Widespread ST-elevation with PR depression isthe electrocardiographic hallmark, although changes are
nonspeci ﬁc and may be transient.
Clinical manifestations of myocarditis are varied and
include chest pain that is often sharp and re ﬂective of
epicardial in ﬂammation involving the pericardium.
Myocardial dysfunction often causes fatigue and exercise
intolerance, and predomina nce of heart failure distin-
guishes myocarditis from pericarditis. Troponin is usuallyelevated ( 15).
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. CMR with late gadolinium enhancement imaging can
show characteristic changes of acute myopericarditis,especially if performed early, within 2 weeks of theindex presentation. CMR can also frequently distin-
guish between acute myoperi carditis, other cardiomy-
opathies, and occult MI and other causes of MI andnonobstructive coronary arteries ( 1,2).
2. In patients with suspected acute myopericarditis, or if
there is diagnostic uncertainty, CMR is useful todetermine myocardial edema, thickening, and lateenhancement. CMR may also show evidence of peri-cardial effusions ( 2,16). CMR has a sensitivity of 94% to
100% in detecting in ﬂammation of the pericardium(7-10). CMR features that are suggestive of acute peri-
carditis include enhanceme nt or thickened pericar-
dium, although such ﬁndings can also be seen in the
presence of pericardial ﬁbrosis. In addition, increased
signal on T2-weighted images correlates with edema,
which may be seen in acute myopericarditis. The
presence of pericardial adhesions between the visceraland parietal pericardium may be useful in patientswith suspected acute pericarditis or pericardialconstriction ( 7-10).
3. In patients with suspected myopericarditis, echocar-
diography may show segmen tal left ventricular wall
hypokinesis, which suggests myocardial involvement
in patients with myocarditis and is, therefore, a useful
tool in these patients. Patients with acute pericarditismay also have echocardiographic ﬁndings such as
increased pericardial brightness or pericardial effusionwith or without tamponade physiology. Some patientswith acute pericarditis may also have normal echocar-diographic ﬁndings ( 9,17).
4. In patients with suspected acute pericarditis, cardiac CT
with or without contrast may show features that are
suggestive of acute pericarditis, such as pericardialthickening or enhancement (after contrast administra-tion). Additionally, CT attenuation values of pericardialeffusion can help distinguish between exudative andtransudative pericardial ﬂuid. There are limited data on
the accuracy of cardiac CT in diagnosing acute pericar-ditis; a small study showed that pericardial thickening
or enhancement was the most accurate single parameter
for pericarditis, with sensitivity of 54% to 59% andspeci ﬁcity of 91% to 96%. Therefore, cardiac CT is a
reasonable second-line study in these patients ( 7,8,13).
4.2.4. Acute Chest Pain With Valvular Heart Disease (VHD)
Recommendations for Acute Chest Pain With VHD
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 C-EO1. In patients presenting with acute chest pain with suspected or known history of VHD, TTE is useful in
determining the presence, severity, and cause of VHD.
1 C-EO2. In patients presenting with acute chest pain with suspected or known VHD in whom TTE diagnostic
quality is inadequate, TEE (with 3D imaging if availab le) is useful in determining the severity and cause of
VHD.
2a C-EO3. In patients presenting with acute chest pain with known or suspected VHD, CMR imaging is reasonable as
an alternative to TTE and/or TEE is nondiagnostic.Gulati et al . JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
2021 Chest Pain Guideline NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285e228

Synopsis
Chest pain may occur in the presence of VHD, partic-
ularly stenotic VHD such as aortic valve stenosis andmitral valve stenosis with secondary pulmonary hyper-tension. Chest pain may also occur after papillary muscle
r u p t u r ei nt h es e t t i n go fM Io ri na c u t ed e g e n e r a t i v e
mitral valve disease after spo ntaneous chordal rupture.
Chest pain may also occur in the setting of acute severeaortic insuf ﬁciency, which may be related to acute aortic
pathology such as an aortic dissection manifesting as se-vere acute chest pain that may radiate to the back.
The cause of chest pain in patients with aortic valve
stenosis may be secondary to coexisting obstructive
epicardial CAD ( 1) or, more commonly, chest pain may
occur as a result of coronary microvascular dysfunction(2) in the presence of very elevated left ventricular pres-
sure caused by a high left ventricular afterload, along withthe associated left ventricul ar hypertrophy. The cause of
chest pain in patients with severe mitral valve stenosis ismore likely to be secondary to epicardial obstructive CAD(1) although, less likely, chest pain may occur in isolated
mitral valve stenosis resulting from low cardiac output
and decreased coronary perfusion ( 1).
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Patients with VHD may present with chest pain
particularly in the setting of stenotic VHD, severevalvular regurgitation in the setting of AMI with
ruptured papillary muscle resulting in acute severemitral valve insuf ﬁciency, or acute aortic valve insuf-
ﬁciency in the setting of acute aortic pathology, such as
aortic dissection ( 3,4). TTE is useful in assessing
valvular pathologies because it is widely available and
is therefore a good ﬁrst-line test in these patients to
determine the presence, severity, and cause of VHD ( 3).
2. The ability to attain adequate 3-dimensional (3D)
transthoracic images depends on the ability to obtainadequate 2-dimensional images ( 5). In these clinical
situations where TTE images are technically inade-quate, TEE with 3D images, if required, is useful to
determine the severity and cause of VHD ( 3,6).
3. There may be clinical situations when TTE and TEE
may not be technically adequate to assess the severityand cause of VHD. In such circumstances, CMR may beuseful to objectively assess the severity and cause ofVHD ( 6). The aorta can also be visualized on CMR and
can therefore be used to asse ss acute aortic pathologies
accompanying aortic valve insuf ﬁciency such as aortic
dissection ( 4).
4.3. Evaluation of Acute Chest Pain With Suspected
Noncardiac Causes
Recommendation for Evaluation of Acute Chest Pain With Suspected Noncardiac Causes
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
1 C-EO1. Patients with acute chest pain should be evaluat ed for noncardiac causes if they have persistent or
recurring symptoms despite a negative stress test o r anatomic cardiac evaluation, or a low-risk desig-
nation by a CDP.JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021 Gulati et al .
NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285 2021 Chest Pain Guidelinee229

Synopsis
The differential diagnosis for noncardiac causes of
acute chest pain is quite broad and includes respiratory,musculoskeletal, gastrointestinal, psychological, andother causes ( Table 9 ). Of these, musculoskeletal causes
are the most common, including costochondritis, muscle
strain, and potential consequences of recent or occultchest trauma such as rib fracture. Various gastrointestinalcauses, commonly esophageal, can present with chestpain, including ga strointestinal re ﬂux and esophageal
dysmotility as well as gastritis from either medications orpeptic ulcer disease. Respiratory causes are less frequentbut potentially more serious and include PE, pneumonia,
and pneumothorax. Many patients will have dyspnea in
addition to chest pain. Psychological causes are usuallydiagnoses of exclusion but merit consideration in theright context.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. If acute myocardial injury is ruled out, alternative
diagnoses merit consideration in patients with
persistent or recurrent symptoms. Clinical risk
assessment, with implementation of CDPs whenappropriate, is the key to selecting patients forfurther diagnostic evaluation and also to choosingamong potential diagnostic modalities.TABLE 9 Differential Diagnosis of Noncardiac Chest Pain
Respiratory
Pulmonary embolismPneumothorax/hemothoraxPneumomediastinumPneumonia
Bronchitis
Pleural irritationMalignancy
Gastrointestinal
Cholecystitis
Pancreatitis
Hiatal herniaGastroesophageal re ﬂux disease/gastritis/esophagitis
Peptic ulcer diseaseEsophageal spasmDyspepsia
Chest wall
CostochondritisChest wall trauma or in ﬂammation
Herpes zoster (shingles)Cervical radiculopathy
Breast disease
Rib fractureMusculoskeletal injury/spasm
Psychological
Panic disorderAnxiety
Clinical depression
Somatization disorderHypochondria
Other
Hyperventilation syndrome
Carbon monoxide poisoning
SarcoidosisLead poisoningProlapsed intervertebral discThoracic outlet syndrome
Adverse effect of certain medications (e.g., 5- ﬂuorouracil)
Sickle cell crisisGulati et al . JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
2021 Chest Pain Guideline NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285e230

4.3.1. Evaluation of Acute Chest Pain With Suspected
Gastrointestinal Syndromes
Synopsis
Among outpatients who present with chest pain, approxi-
mately 10% to 20% have a gastrointestinal cause ( 1). Gastroin-
testinal pain may result from stimulation of chemoreceptors byacid or hyperosmolar substances, of mechanoreceptors by
abnormal contraction or distention, or of thermoreceptors ( 2).
Some patients have abnormal perceptions of otherwise normalstimuli. Gastroesophageal re ﬂux disease is the most likely
cause for recurring unexplained chest pain of esophageal origin(3). Chest pain caused by gastroesophageal re ﬂux disease can
mimic myocardial ischemia and may be described as squeezingor burning. The duration can be minutes to hours, often occursafter meals or at night, and can worsen with stress. Depending
on the severity, it may or may not resolve spontaneously or
with antacids. Esophagitis not related to re ﬂux may be caused
by medications, underlying infections such as candidiasis, orradiation injury. Allergic conditions are associated with eosin-ophilic esophagitis, which is diagnosed by biopsy. Esophagealmotility disorders such as achalasia, distal esophageal spasm,and nutcracker esophagus are less common but can present assqueezing retrosternal pain or spasm, often accompanied by
dysphagia.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. The ﬁr s ts t e pi ne v a l u a t i o no fp o t e n t i a le s o p h a g e a l
chest pain is a careful histo ry. Although the clinicalpresentation often does not provide adequate clues to
distinguish cardiac from esophageal pain, some symp-toms may be suggestive of an esophageal cause, such asheartburn, regurgitation, or dysphagia, and relief withantacid or antisecretory agents. These symptoms,
however, are not suf ﬁciently speci ﬁc to be fully diag-
nostic. A history of use of medications such asnonsteroidal anti-in ﬂammatory agents, potassium
supplements, iron, or bisphosphonates should besought. Physical examination is often unrevealing.When an esophageal cause of chest pain is suspected,upper endoscopy should be considered ( 4). Symptoms
and signs that merit early evaluation (usually within 2
weeks) include dysphagia, o dynophagia, gastrointes-
tinal bleeding, unexplained iron de ﬁciency anemia,
weight loss, and recurrent vomiting. Patients withoutthese symptoms may merit a trial of empiric acid sup-pression therapy ( 5). If an upper endoscopy is normal
and the symptoms persist despite a trial of acid sup-pression, consideration should be given to additionalevaluation, such as esophageal function testing and pH
monitoring, to exclude other esophageal causes ( 6).
4.3.2. Evaluation of Acute Chest Pain With Suspected Anxiety
and Other Psychosomatic ConsiderationsRecommendation for Evaluation of Acute Chest Pain With Suspected Gastrointestinal Syndromes
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
2a C-LD1. In patients with recurrent acute chest pain without e vidence of a cardiac or pulmonary cause, evaluation
for gastrointestinal causes is reasonable.
R e c o m m e n d a t i o nf o rE v a l u a t i o no fA c u t eC h e s tP a i nW i t hS u s pected Anxiety and Other Psychosomatic Considerations
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized in Online Data Supplement 25 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
2a B-R1. For patients with recurrent, similar presentations fo ra c u t ec h e s tp a i nw i t hn oe v i d e n c eo fap h y s i o l o g i c a l
cause on prior diagnostic evaluation including a neg ative workup for myocardial ischemia, referral to a
cognitive-behavioral therapist is reasonable ( 1-14).
Synopsis
Although the heart-brain relationship is well estab-
lished ( 15-17 ), its clinical relevance has been enhanced by
recognition of stress cardiomyopathy ( 18,19). Less dra-
matic than the latter syndrome but highly prevalent isrecurrent chest pain despite an giographically normal cor-
onary arteries and no de ﬁnable cardiac disease, includingan assessment for INOCA ( 1-14) .C h e s tp a i ni nt h e s ep a -
tients has been variously labeled angina, angina-like,
“atypical ”angina, or noncardiac chest pain based on its
deviation from characteristic ischemic cardiac discomfort.Prognosis of patients with noncardiac chest pain is largelydevoid of cardiac complications ( 4,9,20-23 ). The close as-
sociation of this symptom with psychological syndromesJACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021 Gulati et al .
NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285 2021 Chest Pain Guidelinee231

such as anxiety, panic attack, depression, somatoform
disorder, and cardiophobia suggests that there may be apsychogenic origin in many patients. These factors havealso raised consideration of mechanisms for noncardiacchest pain such as central nervous system-visceral in-
teractions, low pain thresholds, hyperbody vigilance,
sympathetic activation, as w e l la sa n x i e t y ,d e p r e s s i o n ,
and panic disorder ( 6,7,9,14,23-30 ). It has been reported
that these patients undergo extensive and repetitivecardiac testing and have low referral to cognitive-behavioral therapists, suggesting a lost opportunity forpharmacologic or cognitive-behavioral therapy ( 6).
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Most low-risk patients presenting to the ED or of ﬁce
setting with chest pain do not have life-threateningconditions. Diagnoses may include psychological en-tities such as somatization or noncardiac chest pain ( 1-
13). It has been reported that in low-risk chest pain pa-
tients without evidence of cardiac disease, depression,
anxiety, and gastroesophageal syndromes each excee-ded CAD by almost 10-fold ( 7). Additionally, care of
these patients often includes multiple tests, high cost,
and avoidable radiation exposure (5.0 mSv) ( 6). A low
rate ( <10%) of clinician inquiry, documentation, or
referral has also been noted f or psychological factors,
even in chest pain patients with self-reported anxiety
(6,7). A systematic review of therapy for patients with
chest pain, no evidence of cardiac disease, and psy-chological disorders revealed that antidepressants andanxiolytics had mixed evidence for ef ﬁcacy ( 10), but a
Cochrane database of psychotherapy (17 RCTs) for suchpatients revealed a 32% reduction in chest pain fre-quency ( 11) for a 3-month interval. Approaches using
cognitive-behavioral methods were most effective ( 11).
These results were limited by small study cohortsand patient heterogeneity; however, they do suggestbene ﬁt from consideration of psychogenic factors in
patients who continue to seek evaluation for chest pain
despite previous de ﬁnitive, negative workups.
4.3.3. Evaluation of Acute Chest Pain in Patients With
Sickle Cell Disease
Recommendations for Evaluation of Acute Chest Pain in Patients With Sickle Cell Disease
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplement 26 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In patients with sickle cell disease who report acute chest pain, emergency transfer by EMS to an acute
care setting is recommended ( 1-5).
1 C-LD2. In patients with sickle cell disease who report acute chest pain, ACS should be excluded ( 3-5).
Synopsis
Acute chest syndrome is a leading cause of death for
patients with sickle cell disease ( 1,2). Patients with sickle
cell disease who are experie ncing chest pain require
prompt evaluation ( 3). Although chest pain occurs in most,
other manifestations of acute chest syndrome includeshortness of breath, fever, arm and leg pain, and thepresence of a new density on chest radiography. Older
adolescents and adults with sickle cell disease who pre-
sent with chest pain and shortness of breath should beevaluated for AMI or myocardial ischemia ( 4). AMI occurs
in patients with sickle cell disease at a relatively early age,usually without the traditional risk factors for ACS. Deathfrom ACS in patients with sickle cell disease is signi ﬁ-
cantly high in age-, sex-, and race-matched controls ( 5).
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. In patients with sickle cell disease who experience
chest pain, ACS is associated with signi ﬁcant morbidity
and mortality rates. These patients should betransferred to an acute care setting by EMS when there
is clinical suspicion of ACS.
2. The recommended diagnost ic evaluation for all adults
with sickle cell disease who have a clinical presentationconcerning for acute chest syndrome includes an ECG,troponin test, complete blood count with white bloodcell differential, reticulocyte count, anteroposterior andlateral chest radiograph, and blood and sputum
cultures.
5. EVALUATION OF PATIENTS WITH
STABLE CHEST PAIN
5.1. Patients With No Known CAD Presenting With Stable Chest
Pain
Stable chest pain is a symptom of myocardial ischemia
characterized by chest pain that is provoked with stress
(physical or emotional). Risk status in suspected stableischemic heart disease (SIHD) is not well de ﬁned. Figure 11
provides a description of SIHD risk estimates ( 1).Gulati et al . JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
2021 Chest Pain Guideline NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285e232

5.1.1. Pretest Risk Probability to Guide Need for Stress and
Anatomic Tests
In the evaluation of symptomatic patients with suspected
CAD, use of validated scores to predict the pretest prob-ability of obstructive CAD may be useful to identify low-risk patients for whom testing may be deferred. It ispreferable to use contemporary estimates such as thosepublished in the past 10 years, such as the pretest prob-ability proposed by Juarez-Orozco et al. ( 1) in preference
to scores from historical patient series, which may over-
estimate the frequency of obstr uctive CAD. Alternatively,
low-risk patients may be those <40 years of age or whohave symptoms that have a low likelihood of representing
ischemia ( Section 5.1.2 ). When available, information on
the presence and amount of CAC may be useful for
enhancing the pretest probability of obstructive CAD, as
shown in Figure 11 (2). This information can be obtained
from performing a CAC scan or, when available, from avisual estimation of CAC based on prior noncardiac chestCT. Among the remaining patients classi ﬁed as
intermediate-high risk, selective testing may improvediagnosis of CAD and for risk strati ﬁcation purposes ( 1-5).
5.1.2. Low-Risk Patients With Stable Chest Pain and No Known CADFIGURE 11 Pretest Probabilities of Obstructive CAD in Symptomatic Patients According to Age, Sex, and Symptoms
Modiﬁed from Juarez-Orozco et al. ( 1) and Winther et al. ( 2). 1) The pretest probability shown is for patients with anginal symptoms. Patients with lower-risk
symptoms would be expected to have lower pretest probability. 2) The darker green- and orange-shaded regions denote the groups in which noninvasivetesting is most bene ﬁcial (pretest probability >15%). The light green –shaded regions denote the groups with pretest probability of CAD #15% in which the
testing for diagnosis may be considered based on clinical judgment ( 1). 3) If CAC is available, it can also be used to estimate the pretest probability based on
CAC score ( 2). CAC indicates coronary artery calcium; and CAD, coronary artery disease.
Recommendations for Low-Risk Patients With Stable Chest Pain and No Known CAD
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplements 27 and 28 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. For patients with stable chest pain and no known C AD presenting to the outpatient clinic, a model to
estimate pretest probability of obstructive CAD is effective to identify patients at low risk for obstructive
CAD and favorable prognosis in whom additi onal diagnostic testing can be deferred ( 1-5).
2a B-R2. For patients with stable chest pain and no known CAD categorized as low risk, CAC testing is reasonable as a ﬁrst-line
test for excluding calci ﬁed plaque and identifying patients with a low likelihood of obstructive CAD ( 6-9).
2a B-NR3. For patients with stable chest pain and no known CAD categorized as low risk, exercise testing without
i m a g i n gi sr e a s o n a b l ea sa ﬁrst-line test for excluding myocardial ischemia and determining functional
capacity in patients with an interpretable ECG ( 10).JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021 Gulati et al .
NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285 2021 Chest Pain Guidelinee233

Synopsis
Over the past several decades, patient presentation and
observed obstructive CAD prevalence has changed, thusaffecting patient selection for diagnostic testing. Currentobservations in the United States include:
nTypical exertional angina prevalence is generally low(<10%), with more patients presenting without the
classic demand-related symptoms ( 11). Symptoms can
be infrequent (i.e., on a weekly or monthly basis)
(12,13), which challenges the diagnostic evaluation.
nAmong patients undergoing a diagnostic evaluation,
there is a relatively low prevalence of obstructive CADand ischemia (i.e., w10%) ( 11,14,15).
nTraditional pretest risk scores largely overestimate
disease probability and contribute to overtesting(16-19 ).
nCurrent testing patterns result in a high normal coro-
nary angiography rate (upward of 50% –60%) ( 20,21).
For the aforementioned reasons, use of a contemporary
pretest probability estimates to de ﬁne low-risk patients
not requiring additional diagnostic testing is a primary
goal of the initial evaluation of symptomatic patients withsuspected CAD ( 5). Even when contemporary pretest
probability estimates are used, they have a low speci ﬁcity
for identifying patients with obstructive CAD. A CAC score
of zero can be useful to identify patients with stable chestpain who are low risk, have a low likelihood of obstructiveCAD, and a low risk of future cardiovascular events ( 7).
Additionally, exercise testing without imaging is also
reasonable to perform in low-risk individuals with stablechest pain and no known CAD to exclude myocardialischemia and assess functional capacity ( 10)(Figure 12 ).
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. There are several pretest probability scores for use in
symptomatic patients with suspected CAD. Older pre-
test probability scores, such as the Diamond-Forrester
model developed in 1979, estimates the probability ofobstructive CAD, resulting in signi ﬁcant overestimation
in contemporary patients referred for noninvasiveimaging, particularly women ( 1). Newer pretest proba-
bility estimates are available ( 4). The CAD Consortium
models include basic (age, sex, symptoms, and hospitalsetting); clinical (basic model þrisk factors: diabetes,
hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and smoking); and
extended (clinical model þCAC) versions. Each new
variant is better than older models, and the addition ofvariables within each model level improves prediction(3). A major strength of these models is the extensive
validation in different hospitals, settings, and countries.Another updated model to estimate the pretest proba-bility of obstructive CAD was recently developed ( 4,22)
and has been recommended by the ESC guidelines,
further reinforcing that the prevalence of obstructive
CAD among symptomatic patients is substantially lowerthan predicted estimates.
2. Among symptomatic patients, a CAC score of zero
identi ﬁes a low-risk cohort of patients who may not
require additional diagnostic testing; most eventsoccur among patients with detectable CAC (e.g., 84% inthe PROMISE trial) ( 7,9). Several randomized trials
evaluated the role of CAC in guiding selective use of
follow-up testing, including CCTA ( 6,7). From the
CRESCENT 1 (Comprehensive Cardiac CT Versus Exer-cise Testing in Suspected Coronary Artery Disease)trial, 350 symptomatic patients were randomized toCAC scanning versus exercise ECGs ( 7). Only patients
with detectable CAC or high pretest risk (141/242) un-d e r w e n tf o l l o w - u pC C T A .A t1y e a r ,t h eC A Ca r mw a s
associated with a reduction in cardiovascular disease
events when compared with those who underwentexercise testing alone (p ¼0.011).
3. Exercise testing was shown to be an effective diag-
nostic strategy in low-risk symptomatic women fromthe WOMEN (What Is the Optimal Method forIschemia Evaluation in Women) trial, when comparedwith exercise MPI ( 10). Using this approach, there
was no signi ﬁcant difference in CAD death or hospi-
talization for an ACS or heart failure, with either test,but exercise testing alone provided signi ﬁcant cost
savings.Gulati et al . JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
2021 Chest Pain Guideline NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285e234

5.1.3. Intermediate-High Risk Patients With Stable Chest Pain
and No Known CAD
Recommendations for Intermediate-High Risk P atients With Stable Chest Pain and No Known CAD
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplements 29 and 30 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
Index Diagnostic Testing
Anatomic Testing
1A1. For intermediate-high risk patients with stable chest pain and no known CAD, CCTA is effective for
diagnosis of CAD, for risk strati ﬁcation, and for guiding treatment decisions ( 1-12).
Stress Testing
1 B-R2. For intermediate-high risk patients with stable chest pain and no known CAD ,s t r e s si m a g i n g( s t r e s s
echocardiography, PET/SPECT MPI or CMR) is effect ive for diagnosis of myocardial ischemia and for
estimating risk of MACE ( 8,13-35 ).
2a B-R3. For intermediate-high risk patients with stable chest pain and no known CAD for whom rest/stress nu-
clear MPI is selected, PET is reasona ble in preference to SPECT, if ava ilable to improve diagnostic ac-
curacy and decrease the rate of nondiagnostic test results ( 36-39 ).
2a B-R4. For intermediate-high risk patients with stable chest pain and no known CAD with an interpretable ECG
and ability to achieve maximal levels of exercise ( ‡5 METs), exercise electroca rdiography is reasonable
(8,13,15,40-45 ).
2b B-NR5. In intermediate-high risk patients with stable che st pain selected for stress MPI using SPECT, the use of
attenuation correction or prone imaging may be re asonable to decrease the rate of false-positive ﬁndings
(46-51 ).
Assessment of Left Ventricular Function
1 B-NR6. In intermediate-high risk patients with stable c hest pain who have pathological Q waves, symptoms or
signs suggestive of heart failure, complex ventric ular arrhythmias, or a heart murmur with unclear
diagnosis, use of TTE is effective for diagnosis of resting left ventricular systolic and diastolic ventricular
function and detection of myocardial, val vular, and pericardial abnormalities ( 13,14,52).
Sequential or Add-on Testing: What to Do if Index Test Results are Positive or Inconclusive
2a B-NR7. For intermediate-high risk patients with stable chest pain and known coronary stenosis of 40% to 90% in
a proximal or middle coronary segment on CCTA, FFR -CT can be useful for diagnosis of vessel-speci ﬁc
ischemia and to guide decision-making regard ing the use of coronary revascularization ( 12,53-58 ).
2a B-NR8. For intermediate-high risk patients with stable ches t pain after an inconclusive or abnormal exercise ECG
or stress imaging study, CCTA is reasonable ( 5,59-63 ).
2a B-NR9. For intermediate-high risk patients with stable ch est pain and no known CAD undergoing stress testing,
the addition of CAC testing can be useful ( 64-70 ).
2a B-NR10. For intermediate-high risk patients with stable chest pain after inconclusive CCTA, stress imaging is
reasonable ( 13,14,20-23 ,40,71-76 ).
2b C-EO11. For intermediate-high risk patients with stable chest pain after a negative stress test but with high
clinical suspicion of CAD, CCTA or ICA may be reasonable.JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021 Gulati et al .
NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285 2021 Chest Pain Guidelinee235

Synopsis
The approach to the diagnostic evaluation of patients
with no known CAD who are at intermediate to high risk(Figure 12 ) should be guided by the ability to achieve high-
quality imaging as well as local availability and expertise.
Intermediate-high risk patients have modest rates of
obstructive CAD ( w10% –20%) and risk of clinical events
(w1%–2% per year) ( 1,5,8,77-80 ). CCTA is preferable in
those <65 years of age and not on optimal preventive
therapies, while stress testing may be advantageous inthose$65 years of age, because they have a higher likeli-
hood of ischemia and obstructive CAD ( 34-36 ,81-83 ).
Although previous guidelines supported direct referral to
ICA among patients with stable chest pain, contemporary
randomized trials support that candidates for electivecoronary angiography may be safely triaged using CCTA(1,84) or noninvasive stress testing ( 34,35).
Patient characteristics and existing contraindications
for a given test modality ( Tables 5 and 6 )s h o u l db e
considered when choosing a d iagnostic test. Imaging of
obese patients, especially those with morbid obesity (body
mass index >40), can be challenging and requires careful
consideration of available equipment. In obese patients,contrast enhancement is use ful to improve imaging qual-
ity. In certain patients, it may be important to undergoexercise testing so to collect data on the hemodynamic orsymptomatic response to exercise. In patients selected forstress imaging who are able to exercise, exercise testing ispreferred over pharmacologic stress to improve the diag-
nostic and prognostic infor mation of the test. Although
PET and SPECT are grouped together, PET has improveddiagnostic and prognostic p erformance, especially when
quantitative assessment of MBF can be performed ( 36-39 ).
Irrespective of the test performed, an overarching goal
of the evaluation of symptomatic patients is to identifythose who would bene ﬁtf r o mG D M T ,a sd e ﬁned by the
2014 SIHD guidelines, the 2018 cholesterol-lowering
guidelines, and the 2019 prevention guidelines
(13,85-87 ). For this evaluation, the patient should be
engaged in a process of shared decision-making beforedetermining the ﬁnal choice of the cardiac test modality
and in guiding the pathway for treatment decisions.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
Anatomic Testing
1. Clinical trials report a higher diagnostic sensitivity for
CCTA compared with stress testing for detectingobstructive CAD on ICA ( 2-4,37,38,88). CCTA without
stenosis or plaque has a low CAD event rate. From thePROMISE trial, the 3-year CAD event rate for negativetestﬁ
ndings was 0.9% for CCTA versus 2.1% for stress
testing ( 17).
Randomized trials comparing the effectiveness of
CCTA versus stress testing report similar near-termeffectiveness (at w2–3 years of follow-up) ( 7,8,10-12 ,89).
In the SCOT-HEART (Scottish Computed Tomography ofthe Heart) trial, the addition of CCTA to standard of careresulted in a reduction in 5-year CAD death or AMI whencompared with standard care alone (predominantly ex-
ercise ECG) (HR: 0.59; 95% CI: 0.41-0.84; p ¼0.004) ( 9).
From a prespeci ﬁed analysis from the PROMISE trial,
patients with diabetes who underwent CCTA had a lowerrisk of cardiovascular deat ho rM Iw h e nc o m p a r e dw i t h
those randomized to stress testing (adjusted HR: 0.38;95% CI: 0.18-0.79; p ¼0.01) ( 6). Especially for patients
with nonobstructive and obstructive CAD, CCTA moreoften prompts initiation and intensi ﬁcation of preventive
and anti-ischemic therapies than other diagnostic strate-
gies ( 6,89-96 ). Several randomized trials compared the
effectiveness of CCTA versus direct referral to ICA amongsymptomatic patients ( 1,5). From the CONSERVE trial, a
strategy of initial CCTA was associated with lower costbut similar 1-year MACE rates (d eath, ACS, stroke, urgent/
emergency coronary revascularization, or cardiac hospi-talization) as direct ICA (4.6% versus 4.6%) ( 5).
Stress Testing
2. The prognostic value of st ress echocardiography has
been demonstrated in large observational series with
low rates of CAD events for patients with normal testresults, particularly those w ith good exercise tolerance
(71,72,97-99 ). In the PROMISE trial, patients random-
ized to stress testing had no difference in the primary
outcome of death, ACS, or major procedural compli-cations as compared to CCTA ( 100). For stress nuclear
imaging, multicenter registr ies support effective risk
strati ﬁcation based on rest/stress measures of MPI and
left ventricular function ( 13,21,27,28,98,101,102), with
recent evidence on the prognostic value of stress PET(26,37,38,103,
104). Randomized trials have compared
the effectiveness of rest/stress MPI with other nonin-vasive tests, such as CMR ( 105)a n dC C T A ,r e v e a l i n g
similar 1- to 3-year outcomes. Two multicenter trialshave evaluated the effectiveness of a CMR-guided
strategy as compared to standard testing approaches
(34,35). The CE-MARC 2 multicenter trial (n ¼1,202)
revealed that both CMR and SPECT MPI were associ-ated with similar rates (i.e., 7.1% –7.5%) of unnecessary
invasive angiography (de ﬁned as a no CAD
stenosis $70% or a normal invasive FFR) compared
with standard testing for chest pain (28.8%; p <0.001)
(34). The MR-INFORM trial r andomized 918 patients
with typical angina and multiple risk factors or a pos-
itive exercise ECG to a CMR strategy versus invasiveFFR strategy ( 35). The CMR strategy was associated
with less coronary revascularization (p ¼0.005) and a
s i m i l a re v e n tr a t e( d e a t h ,A M I ,o rt a r g e tv e s s e lr e v a s -cularization; p ¼0.91).Gulati et al . JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
2021 Chest Pain Guideline NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285e236

3. Although PET and SPECT are grouped together, PET
has improved diagnostic and prognostic perfor-mance, especially when quantitative assessment ofMBF can be performed ( 36-39 ). A recent clinical
trial (n ¼475) reported a higher diagnostic accuracy
with stress PET MPI compared with other stress test
modalities ( 38).
4. Diagnostic accuracy of the exercise ECG is lower (i.e.,
sensitivity and speci ﬁcity range, 60% –77%) than
stress imaging, but prognostication remains a usefulgoal ( 13,41). In the WOMEN trial including 824
symptomatic women, exercise ECG was equallyeffective when compared with exercise SPECT MPI,
with similar 2-year CAD event rates (2.0% versus
2.3%; p ¼0.59) ( 40) .F a i l u r et oc o m p l e t et h e ﬁrst stage
of the Bruce protocol (or <5M E T s )o rt oa c h i e v e8 5 %
of age-predicted ﬁtness level increases CAD event
risk ( 13,41-45 ). Patients exercising to Bruce stage III
or>10 METs with a negative ECG have a low risk of
CAD events. In patients with submaximal exercise orfor those with an ischemic ECG $1.0 mm ST
depression, additional stress imaging may improve
risk detection and guide clinical management ( 41).
Marked ischemia (e.g., $2.0 mm at reduced work-
loads) or high Duke or Lauer scores signify increasedrisk among women and men ( 13,41,42,44); such pa-
tients may bene ﬁt from additional testing (anatomic
or stress testing).
5. Use of attenuation correction algorithms and prone
imaging can reduce MPI artifacts ( 46-51 ).
Assessment of Left Ventricular Function
6. Clinical practice guidelines and appropriate use criteria
support use of TTE as appropriate for the assessment ofregional and global left ventricular function ( 13,14).
The likelihood of abnormal ﬁndings increases when
TTE is performed selectively among higher risk pa-
tients, such as those with electrocardiographic Q wavesor heart failure symptoms, complex ventricular ar-rhythmias, or a heart murmur ( 52).Sequential or Add-on Testing
6. The use of FFR-CT is supported by several studies
(56,57,104), including one reporting improved diag-
nostic accuracy with FFR-CT versus coronary CT alonewhen applying invasive FFR as the gold standard ( 56).
Several multinational regi stries have examined the
utility of FFR-CT with regards to guiding clinical
decision-making and the saf ety of deferring coronary
revascularization in patients with a negative FFR-CT
(12,26,53,54). In the ADVANCE registry, FFR-CT
changed treatment recommendations in two-thirdsof 5,083 patients, and there were no MACE at 90days for patients with a negative FFR-CT ( 54). FFR-CT
is most bene ﬁcial when measured in a coronary ste-
nosis of 40% to 90% severity located in a proximal ormid-coronary artery segment ( 54,106,107).
7. Use of CCTA after stress testing can diagnose or
exclude obstructive CAD and identify patients who
may bene ﬁt from referral to ICA ( 5,59-61 ,63). The
ISCHEMIA trial used CCTA a fter site-determined
moderate-severe ischemia to exclude patients withnonobstructive CAD and id entifying those with sig-
niﬁcant left main stenosis who bene ﬁt from prompt
referral to ICA ( 63,108). Half of the screen failures for
the ISCHEMIA trial were identi ﬁed by CCTA including
those with nonobstructive CAD or unprotected left
main CAD.
8. Observational registry data suggest that adding CAC
can improve risk assessment, reduce diagnostic un-certainty, help detect atherosclerotic plaque, andguide preventive management ( 64-70 ,94,109,110).
9. After an initial exercise ECG, data support an
improved diagnostic accuracy and improved risk
strati ﬁcation with further stress imaging, such as with
stress echocardiography ( 13,14,71,72), nuclear MPI ( 20-
23,40,73-76 ), or CMR ( 35,111-113 ).
10. For the symptomatic patients with negative stress test
ﬁndings, selective use of CCTA or invasive coronary
angiography can help detect obstructive CAD andatherosclerotic plaque and re duce diagnostic certainty.JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021 Gulati et al .
NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285 2021 Chest Pain Guidelinee237

FIGURE 12 Clinical Decision Pathway for Patients With Stable Chest Pain and No Known CAD
Test choice should be guided by local availability and expertise. *Test choice guided by patient ’s exercise capacity, resting electrocardiographic abnormalities; CCTA
preferable in those <65 years of age and not on optimal preventive therapies; stress testing favored in those $65 years of age (with a higher likelihood of ischemia).
†High-risk CAD means left main stenosis $50%; anatomically signi ﬁcant 3-vessel disease ( $70% stenosis). CAD indicates coronary artery disease; CCTA, coronary CT
angiography; CMR, cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging; CT, computed tomography; FFR-CT, fractional ﬂow reserve with CT; GDMT, guideline-directed medical
therapy; INOCA, ischemia and no obstructive CAD; PET, positron emission tomography; and SPECT, single-photon emission CT.Gulati et al . JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
2021 Chest Pain Guideline NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285e238

5.2. Patients With Known CAD Presenting With Stable Chest Pain
Synopsis
In patients with known CAD, clinicians should opt to
intensify GDMT ﬁrst, if there is an opportunity to do so,
and defer testing. Although GDMT exists for obstructiveCAD, there are no current guidelines that are speci ﬁct o
nonobstructive CAD. Thus, adhering to atherosclerotic CVprevention guidelines is recommended ( 4,5).
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. ACC/AHA clinical practice guidelines for treatment of
patients with stable CAD recommend optimization ofanti-ischemic and preventi ve therapies with the goal to
reduce the patient ’s angina burden and improve clin-
ical outcomes ( 6,7).
2. For all patients with a history of CAD risk factors,
optimized preventive therapy should be used accord-ing to ACC/AHA clinical practice guidelines ( 4,5).
5.2.1. Patients With Obstructive CAD Who Present With Stable
Chest PainRecommendations for Patients With Known CAD Presenting With Stable Chest Pain
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplement 31 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1A1. For patients with obstructive CAD and stable chest pain, it is recommended to optimize GDMT ( 1-3).
1 C-EO2. For patients with known nonobstructive CAD and s table chest pain, it is recommended to optimize
preventive therapies ( 4,5).
Recommendations for Patients With Obstructive CAD Who Present With Stable Chest Pain
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplements 32 and 33 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
Index Diagnostic Testing
Anatomic Testing
1A1. For patients with obstructive CAD who have stab le chest pain despite GDMT and moderate-severe
ischemia, ICA is recommended for guid ing therapeutic decision-making ( 1-4).
1A2. For patients with obstructive CAD who have stable chest pain despite optimal GDMT, those referred for
ICA without prior stress testing bene ﬁt from FFR or instantaneous wave free ratio ( 3,5-7).
1 B-R3. For symptomatic patients with obstructive CAD who have stable chest pain with CCTA-de ﬁned‡50%
stenosis in the left main coronary artery, obstructive CAD with FFR with CT £0.80, or severe stenosis
(‡70%) in all 3 main vessels, ICA is effective for guiding therapeutic decision-making ( 4,8).
2a B-NR4. For patients who have stable chest pain with previou s coronary revascularization, CCTA is reasonable to
evaluate bypass graft or stent patency (for stents ‡3m m )( 9-13 ).
Stress Testing
1 B-NR5. For patients with obstructive CAD who have stable chest pain despite optimal GDMT, stress PET/SPECT
MPI, CMR, or echocardiography is recommended for dia gnosis of myocardial ischemia, estimating risk of
MACE, and guiding therapeutic decision-making ( 14-36 ).
2a B-R6. For patients with obstructive CAD who have stable chest pain despite optimal GDMT, when selected for
rest/stress nuclear MPI, PET is rea sonable in preference to SPECT, if a vailable, to improve diagnostic
accuracy and decrease the rate of nondiagnostic test results ( 37).
2a B-NR7. For patients with obstructive CAD who have stable ch est pain despite GDMT, exerc ise treadmill testing can
be useful to determine if the symptoms are consistent with angina pectoris, assess the severity of symp-
toms, evaluate functional capacity and select ma nagement, including cardiac rehabilitation ( 4,38-40 ).
2a B-NR8. For patients with obstructive CAD who have stable chest pain symptoms undergoing stress PET MPI or stress CMR,
the addition of MBFR is useful to improve diagnosis accuracy and enhance risk strati ﬁcation ( 31-36 ).JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021 Gulati et al .
NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285 2021 Chest Pain Guidelinee239

Synopsis
In patients with known CAD, physicians should opt to
intensify GDMT ﬁrst, if there is an opportunity to do so,
and defer testing. In patients with a history of obstructiveCAD, previous AMI, or previous coronary revasculariza-
tion, assessing the severity of ischemia may be useful to
guide clinical decision-making regarding the use of ICAand intensify preventive and anti-ischemic therapy. Im-aging should be considered in those with new onset orpersistent stable chest pain ( Figure 13 ). In patients with
frequent angina or severe stress-induced ischemia,referral to ICA or CCTA is an option ( 4). Among in-
dividuals with known obstructive CAD or ischemic heartdisease who have stable symptoms, exercise treadmill
testing may be useful for assessing functional capacity,
assessing the type and severity of symptoms, andinforming the role of coronary revascularization, cardiac
rehabilitation, or anti-anginal therapy ( 4,38-40 ).
FIGURE 13 Clinical Decision Pathway for Patients With Stable Chest Pain (or Equiva lent) Symptoms With Prior MI, Prior Revascularization, or Known CAD on
Invasive Coronary Angiography or CCTA, Including Those With Nonobstructive CAD
Test choice should be guided by local availability and expertise. *Known CAD means prior MI, revascularization, known obstructive CAD, nonobstruct ive CAD. †High-risk
CAD means left main stenosis $50%; or obstructive CAD with FFR-CT #0.80. ‡Test choice guided by the patient ’s exercise capacity, resting electrocardiographic
abnormalities. §Patients with prior CABG or stents >3.0 mm. Follow-up Testing and Intensi ﬁcation of GDMT Guided by Initial Test Results and Persistence / Worsening /
Frequency of Symptoms and Shared Decision Making . CABG indicates coronary artery bypass graft; CAD, coronary artery disease; CCTA, coronary CT angiography; CMR,
cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging; CT, computed tomography; ECG, electrocardiogram; FFR-CT, fractional ﬂow reserve with CT; GDMT, guideline-directed
medical therapy; ICA, invasive coronary angiography; iFR, instant wave-free ratio; INOCA, ischemia and no obstructive coronary artery disease; MI , myocardial infarction;
MPI, myocardial perfusion imaging; PET, positron emission tomography; SIHD, stable ischemic heart disease; and SPECT, single-photon emission CT.Gulati et al . JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
2021 Chest Pain Guideline NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285e240

Recommendation-Speci ﬁcS u p p o r t i v eT e x t
Anatomic Testing
1. SIHD randomized trials reveal a pattern that ischemia-
guided percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) re-s u l t si na ni m p r o v e m e n ti na n g i n aw h e nc o m p a r e dwith medical therapy alone ( 1-4,41). In the ISCHEMIA
trial, a total of 5,179 patients with stable CAD and site-determined moderate-severe ischemia on stresstesting were randomized to invasive versus conserva-
tive care strategies ( 4). No difference in the composite
primary MACE endpoint was observed at w3.3 years of
follow-up. Patients presen ting with daily, weekly, or
monthly angina had a prompt and durable improve-ment in symptoms when randomized to invasivecompared with conservative management ( 41).
2. Coronary revascularization after identi ﬁcation of sus-
pected lesion-speci ﬁci s c h e m i a( F F R #0.80 or instan-
taneous wave-free ratio #0.89) in obstructive CAD is
associated with improved event-free survivalc o m p a r e dw i t ht h eu s eo fP C Id e t e r m i n e db ya n a t o m yalone ( 3,5,6,42).
3. In a patient presenting with new or recurrent chest
pain symptoms, progression of CAD (i.e., new orworsening stenosis or more extensive nonobstructiveatherosclerotic plaque) may be characterized using
CCTA ( 43,44). Detection of nonobstructive CAD often
results in prompt initiation and intensi ﬁcation of pre-
ventive and anti-ischemic therapies with CCTA ( 45-50 ).
There is a high degree of concordance between CCTA-and ICA-determined obstructive CAD ( 33,51-55 ). CCTA-
deﬁned left main stenosis (nonobstructive and $50%
stenosis) is associated with a high CAD event risk(56,57). Coronary revasculariz ation confers a survival
bene ﬁt among patients with left main CAD ( 58). From
randomized trials, major clinical outcomes in patientswith left main CAD are similar with CABG and PCI atnear-term follow-up of 1 to 2 years, although repeatrevascularization rates are higher after PCI ( 58).
4. CCTA has been shown to be accurate for the assess-
ment of native vessel CAD and bypass graft patencywith high accuracy ( w96%) and concordance (82% –
>93%) to ICA; it may also be useful to assess patency of
proximal large stents ( $3 mm) if such information is
known at the time of presentation ( 9-13). Several
controlled clinical trials have evaluated the concor-dance of FFR-CT with invasive FFR ( 59-62 ). Diagnostic
sensitivity of FFR-CT compared with invasive FFR ishigh ( 32,60).
Stress Testing
5. Observational ﬁndings reveal that patients with
moderate-severe ischemia on PET and SPECT MPI have
an improved outcome with early coronaryrevascularization ( 20,34,63-65 ). Patients with
moderate-severe ischemia on PET ( $10% ischemic
myocardium) treated with PCI reported an improve-ment in angina when compared with those treatedmedically ( 20). Prespeci ﬁed substudies from thera-
peutic strategy trials for SIHD also evaluated the role of
rest/stress nuclear MPI to assess residual ischemiaseverity among patients with known CAD who weretreated with medical therapy alone or when combinedwith revascularization ( 1,2,14-18 ).
Clinical trials of CMR have included subgroups with
obstructive CAD, including 76% and 49% in the MR-IMPACT and MR-IMPACT2 studies, respectively,showing generally comparable diagnostic accuracy tostress SPECT MPI ( 23,24). Several large, multicenter reg-
istries reveal that stress CMR effectively risk strati ﬁes
patients with known CAD ( 27-30 ). In a multicenter regis-
try of 2,496 patients with a history of CAD, an abnormal
stress CMR had a nearly 2-fold i ncreased mortality hazard
(27). From the SPINS Registry (Stress CMR Perfusion Im-
aging in the United States), patients with known CAD with
MPI ischemia and scarring by late gadolinium enhance-ment had a relative hazard of 1.5 to 2.1 for CV death ornonfatal MI ( 30). Prognosis worsens for patients by the
extent and severity of inducible wall motion abnormal-
ities on stress echocardiography ( 66,67). Recent random-
ized trial evidence supports the role of stressechocardiography to guide clin ical decision-making. From
the ORBITA (Objective Randomized Blinded InvestigationWith Optimal Medical Therapy in Stable Angina) trial,there was a greater reduction in the stress echocardio-graphic wall motion score among patients with single-vessel CAD treated with PCI compared with placebo
(p<0.0001) ( 68). In a secondary analysis, there was an
interaction between the baseline stress echocardiographicw a l lm o t i o ns c o r ea n dt h ee f ﬁcacy of PCI for improved
angina at 6 weeks of follow-up ( 69). That is, PCI-treated
patients with a wall motion score $1w e r em o r eo f t e n
a n g i n a - f r e ec o m p a r e dw i t ht h o s ei nt h ep l a c e b oa r m .
6. Evidence supports that the improved diagnostic accu-
racy of PET MPI is helpful in the patient with knownCAD. In a randomized trial of 322 symptomatic patientswith known CAD, the presence of low- and high-riskstress PET ﬁndings was associated with lower and
higher rates of ICA when compared with SPECT MPI
(p¼0.001) ( 37). In this trial, nearly 1 in 5 patients with
low-risk SPECT MPI ﬁndings underwent ICA, a rate
more than twice that of stress PET MPI. Based on suchevidence, PET is preferable over SPECT when both areavailable.
7. Observational studies of patients with CAD and stable
chest pain have demonstrate dt h a te x e r c i s et r e a d m i l l
testing can be useful by evaluating the relation ofJACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021 Gulati et al .
NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285 2021 Chest Pain Guidelinee241

symptoms to graded stress testing, thereby helping to
conﬁrm the diagnosis of angina pectoris; assessing
symptom severity; and selecting appropriate manage-ment: medical therapy, revascularization, and/or car-diac rehabilitation ( 4,38-40 ).
Secondary Diagnostic Testing: For the Assessment of
Vascular Territory Flow or Vessel-Speci ﬁcI s c h e m i a
8. Measurement of MBFR, when reduced, re ﬂects abnor-
malities of ﬂow within the epicardial coronary arteries
and/or microvasculature and independently predictsrisk of major CAD events. This can be effectively
accomplished using PET ( 31,70,71)o rC M R( 28). Normal
MBFR may be helpful in excluding high risk anatomy,although reduced levels may provide a better estimateof disease extent and severity. In the presence of
nonobstructive CAD, reduced MBFR may signify coro-
nary microvascular dysfunction, especially amongwomen ( 70).
5.2.1.1. Patients With Prior CABG Surgery With Stable
Chest Pain
Recommendations for Patients With Prior CABG Surgery With Stable Chest Pain
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 C-LD1. In patients who have had prior CABG surgery presenting with stable chest pain whose noninvasive stress
test results show moderate -to-severe ischemia ( 1-7), or in those suspected to have myocardial ischemia
with indeterminate/nondiagnostic stress test, IC A is recommended for guiding therapeutic decision-
making ( 1).
2a C-LD2. In patients who have had prior CABG surgery presen ting with stable chest pain who are suspected to have
myocardial ischemia, it is reasonable to perform stress imaging or CCTA to evaluate for myocardial
ischemia or graft stenosis or occlusion ( 8-15 ).
Synopsis
In patients with prior CABG who have stable chest pain,
it is important to assess medical therapies and optimize allguideline-directed therapies ( 1). ICA can be useful to guide
therapeutic decision-making in those with frequentangina that has not improved with medical therapy ( 1-9).
In those whose symptoms do improve after optimizingmedical therapy, evaluation with stress testing can beuseful to assess the degree of myocardial ischemia and
determine which patients may bene ﬁtf r o mc o r o n a r y
angiography ( 6,10). CCTA can also be used to detect graft
patency but is often less robust for assessing native cor-onary vessel stenosis in those with prior CABG, because ofhigh degree of nondiagnostic segments ( 8-15).
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. There are stress test features in patients with prior
CABG and presenting with stable chest pain that may
indicate a high likelihood of severe ischemic heart dis-ease such as stress electrocardiographic ﬁndings
including 2 mm of ST-segment depression at lowworkload or persisting into re covery, exercise-induced
ST-segment elevation, or exercise-induced VT/VF, se-vere stress-induced left ventricular systolic dysfunc-tion, stress-induced perfusi on abnormalities involving
$10% myocardium or stress-induced left ventricular
dilation. In these patients with prior CABG and high-risk imaging features, refe rral for ICA is reasonable
provided that these patients are amenable to and arecandidates for coronary revascularization ( 1-7). Patients
with prior CABG presenting with stable chest pain may
have stress imaging features that are equivocal ornondiagnostic for the presence of myocardial ischemia.Equivocal or nondiagnostic stress tests may be a resultof patient ’s body habitus, inadequate or suboptimal
heart rate, arrhythmias such as atrial ﬁbrillation, left
bundle branch block, or patient motion. In these pa-tients, performing an ICA is reasonable when the
angiographic ﬁndings have a high likelihood of
impacting therapeutic decisions ( 1).
2. Stable chest pain due to myocardial ischemia may occur in
patients with prior CABG because of progression ofatherosclerosis in the native coronary arteries or within thebypass grafts. Noninvasive stress imaging testing isreasonable in these patients to identify ischemic myocardialterritories that will further guide revascularization for pa-
tients who are amenable to and are candidates for revas-
cularization. Furthermore, stress imaging also assists instratifying patients to determine the degree of likelihood forsevere ischemic heart disease, which will assist in thera-peutic decisions ( 8-10,12-14 ). CCTA has a great degree of
accuracy with a sensitivity and speci ﬁcity of detecting
complete graft occlusions, 99% and 99%, respectively,when compared with the standard of ICA (20). Further-
more, CCTA was ideal in assessing bypass grafts attributable
to the large size of these vessels, decreased vessel calci ﬁ-
cation and decreased motion of these vessels whencompared with native coronary vessels, with successfulGulati et al . JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
2021 Chest Pain Guideline NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285e242

evaluation of bypass grafts in 93% to 100% of patients ( 15).
In patients who have stable chest pain and are previouslyknown to have borderline graft stenosis or are suspected tohave new graft stenosis, CCTA is useful for assessing graftpatency but less robust for assessing native coronary vesselstenosis in this population because of high degree of non-
diagnostic segments ( 8-15).
5.2.2. Patients With Known Nonobstructive CAD Presenting With
Stable Chest Pain
Recommendations for Patients With Known Nonobs tructive CAD Presenting With Stable Chest Pain
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplements 34 and 35 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
Index Diagnostic Testing
Anatomic Testing
2a B-NR1. For symptomatic patients with known nonobstructiv e CAD who have stable chest pain, CCTA is reasonable
for determining atherosclerotic plaque burden and progression to obstructive CAD, and guiding thera-peutic decision-making ( 1-7).
2a B-NR2. For patients with known coronary stenosis from 40% to 90% on CCTA, FFR can be useful for diagnosis of
vessel-speci ﬁc ischemia and to guide decision- making regarding the use of ICA ( 8-14 ).
Stress Testing
2a C-LD3. For patients with known e xtensive nonobstructive CAD with stable chest pain symptoms, stress imaging
(PET/SPECT, CMR, or echocardiography) is reason able for the diagnosis of myocardial ischemia ( 15-24 ).
Synopsis
For patients with known nonobstructive CAD (luminal
narrowing 1% –49%), CCTA can be useful for detection of
new or worsening obstructive stenosis, atheroscleroticdisease progression, and identi ﬁcation of high-risk plaque
features, such as low attenuation plaque or positive
remodeling ( 1,2,5-7,25)(Figure 13 ). Similarly, stress imag-
ing is reasonable to detect myocardial ischemia and canhelp guide further management and treatment of ischemicburden ( 15-24 ).
Irrespective of the test performed, an overarching goal
of the evaluation of symptomatic patients with knownnonobstructive CAD is to identify those who would bene ﬁt
from intensi ﬁcation of preventive therapy, as de ﬁned by
the 2018 cholesterol-lowering guidelines and the 2019
prevention guidelines ( 26-29 ). For this evaluation, the
patient should be engaged in a p rocess of shared decision-
making before determining the ﬁnal choice of the cardiac
testing modality and in guiding the pathway for treatmentdecisions.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
Anatomic Testing
1. Atherosclerosis is a progre ssive disease that worsens
over time ( 1), with nonobstructive CAD consistently
identi ﬁed as precursor for ACS ( 3-6). From the PROMISE
trial, nonobstructive CAD was associated with a 3-fold
increase in MACE risk over w2y e a r so ff o l l o w - u p( 3).Additional analyses from the SCOT-HEART and PROM-
ISE trials reveal that high-ri sk atherosclerotic plaque
features are associated with an elevated MACE riskamong patients with nonobstructive CAD ( 4,5). CCTA
commonly identi ﬁes patients with nonobstructive CAD
but can further de ﬁne compositional alterations within
the plaque (i.e., noncalci ﬁed plaque) and positive
remodeling ( 4,5,7,25,30) .T h e s ep l a q u ef e a t u r e sh a v e
been associated with inducible ischemia, identi ﬁed as
precursors for ACS, and independently predict MACE(5,6,31). Recently, Williams et al reported that a low
attenuation plaque burden was associated with a
>6-
fold increase in incident MI for patients with non-obstructive CAD ( 4).
2. Controlled clinical trials reveal that FFR-CT improves
diagnostic accuracy over and above obstructive CAD onC C T Aw h e nc o m p a r e dw i t hi n v a s i v eF F R( 12,13).
Multinational registries have examined the use of FFR-CT with regards to the use to drive clinical decision-making regarding the use of follow-up ICA and thesafety of deferring coronary r e v a s c u l a r i z a t i o ni np a -
tients with a negative FFR-CT ( 8-11). From the
ADVANCE (Assessing Diagnostic Value of Non-invasive
FFR-CT in Coronary Care) registry, FFR-CT changedtreatment recommendations in two-thirds of patients,and there were no MACE at 90 days for patients with anegative FFR-CT ( 10). From the SYNTAX 3 trial ( 14),
FFR-CT was performed in 223 patients. TreatmentJACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021 Gulati et al .
NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285 2021 Chest Pain Guidelinee243

recommendations and selection of vessels for revas-
cularization were guided by FFR-CT in w20% of
patients.
Stress Testing
3. Approximately 20% to 30% of patients with non-
obstructive CAD will demonstrate ischemia ( 15-24 ).
Patients who experience ischemia with non-obstructive CAD (INOCA - see section 5.2.3 )b e n e ﬁt
from assessment of functional signi ﬁcance of anintermediate coronary stenosis as it provides insight
into the patient ’sp r e s e n t i n gs y m p t o m sa n dc a nh e l p
guide clinical management.
5.2.3. Patients With Suspected Ischemia and No Obstructive CAD
(INOCA)
Recommendations for myocardial blood ﬂow measure-
ments using PET, echocardiography, and CMR are found
inSection 5.2.2 .
Recommendations for Patients With Suspected INOCA
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplements 36 and 37 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
2a B-NR1. For patients with persistent stable chest pain and nonobstructive CAD and at least mild myocardial
ischemia on imaging, it is reasonable to consider in vasive coronary function testing to improve the
diagnosis of coronary microvascular dysfunction and to enhance risk strati ﬁcation ( 1-4).
2a B-NR2. For patients with persistent stable chest pain and nonobstructive CAD, stress PET MPI with MBFR is
reasonable to diagnose microvascular dysfunction and enhance risk strati ﬁcation ( 5-11).
2a B-NR3. For patients with persistent stable chest pain an d nonobstructive CAD, stress CMR with the addition of
MBFR measurement is reasonable to improve diagnos is of coronary myocardial dysfunction and for
estimating risk of MACE ( 12-14 ).
2b C-EO4. For patients with persistent stable chest pain and nonobstructive CAD, stress echocardiography with the
addition of coronary ﬂow velocity reserve measurement may be reasonable to improve diagnosis of
coronary myocardial dysfunction and for estimating risk of MACE.
Synopsis
Signs and symptoms of ischemia occur because of focal
obstructive CAD, but INOCA is common and may resultfrom alterations in ﬂow within the microvasculature.
Thus, many symptomatic patients without obstructiveCAD on previous workup may be candidates for assess-
ment of coronary microvascular dysfunction and other
causes of INOCA ( 1). Patients at highest risk for coronary
microvascular dysfunction include women, those withhypertension, diabetes, and other insulin-resistant states(15). There is substantive eviden ce that testing focusing on
documentation of coronary or microvascular ﬂow abnor-
malities can aid in the diagnosis of microvascular angina,and abundant evidence supports that the addition of
ﬂow alterations improves risk strati ﬁcation. Invasive cor-
onary reactivity testing allows for the assessment ofvasospasm, in addition to nonendothelial –dependent and
endothelium-dependent microvascular reactivity ( 2,4).
From the National Institutes of Health-NHLBI-sponsoredWISE (Women ’s Ischemia Syndrome Evaluation),
impaired coronary ﬂow reserve (i.e., <2.32) among women
with no obstructive CAD was associated with an elevated
hazard for major CAD events with lengthy follow-up of 10
years (p ¼0.03) ( 2). Among women with no obstructive
CAD, epicardial vasoconstriction was also signi ﬁcantlyassociated with higher rates of hospitalization for angina
(p¼0.0002) ( 2). Prognostic evidence is available support-
ing the novel contribution of PET MBFR techniques;several reports also note a bene ﬁt using CMR and echo-
cardiographic techniques. A proposed diagnostic evalua-tion pathway is outlined in Figure 14 .
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Evidence supports a role for invasive coronary reac-
tivity testing, including prognostic evidence from the
WISE study ( 1,2). The CorMicA (Coronary Microvascular
Angina) trial enrolled symptomatic patients (74%women) without obstructive CAD and positive invasivecoronary reactivity testing (n ¼76 patients to interven-
tion and 75 to the blinded control group). The inter-vention consisted of anti-ischemic therapy using beta-blockers and angiotensin-converting enzyme in-
hibitors along with preventive care (statins) and life-
style changes, including smoking cessation, and wasassociated with a signi ﬁcant improvement in angina
and quality of life over 6 months (p ¼0.001)( 4,16). This
small trial did not report any differences in 6-monthMACE (p ¼0.8).
2. PET measurement of peak myocardial blood ﬂow and
MBFR, when reduced, re ﬂects abnormalities of ﬂowGulati et al . JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
2021 Chest Pain Guideline NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285e244

within the epicardial coronary arteries and microvas-
culature and independently predicts risk of major CADevents ( 5-7,17). PET measurement of MBFR improves
risk strati ﬁcation, including for patients with non-
obstructive CAD, especially women, for whom coro-
nary microvascular dysfunction is suspected ( 18).
3. CMR has been used to eval uate MBFR. When validated
against invasive coronary physiology measures, pixel-wise quantitative myocardial perfusion mapping byCMR was able to identify coronary microvasculardysfunction in a small study that included 23 patientswith nonobstructive CAD ( 19). The addition of coronaryﬂow reserve improves prognostication ( 12-14 ). Stress
CMR studies of MBFR have shown reasonable agree-
ment with PET (n ¼21) (20).
4. Stress echocardiography assessing coronary ﬂow ve-
locity reserve in the left anterior descending artery
with Doppler can currently be combined with wallmotion analysis during vasodilator stress echocardi-ography. Limited data have shown that abnormal cor-onary ﬂow velocity reserve ( #2) adds incremental
value to the prognostic strati ﬁcation achieved with
clinical and angiographic data for events such as deathand nonfatal MI in patients with angiographicallyFIGURE 14 Clinical Decision Pathway for INOCA
Test choice should be guided by local availability and expertise. *Ford T, et al. ( 16).†Cannot exclude microvascular vasospasm. ACh indicates acetylcholine; CAD,
coronary artery disease; CFR, coronary ﬂow reserve; CFVR, coronary ﬂow velocity reserve; CMD, coronary microvascular dysfunction; CV, cardiovascular; FFR, fractional
ﬂow reserve; GDMT, guideline-directed medical therapy; IMR, index of microcirculatory restriction; INOCA, ischemia and no obstructive CAD; MACE, m ajor adverse
cardiovascular events; and MBFR, myocardial blood ﬂow reserve.JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021 Gulati et al .
NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285 2021 Chest Pain Guidelinee245

normal or near-normal coronary arteries and preserved
at-rest regional and global left ventricular function atbaseline and during stress ( 21).
5.3. Cost-Value Considerations in Diagnostic Testing
A general concept regarding cost is that layered testing
(i.e., when a test is followed by more tests) leads to highercosts. To minimize the potential needs for downstreamtesting, clinicians should select the test that is most likely
to answer a particular question.
5.3.1. CCTA and CAC Scanning Cost-Value Considerations
In the outpatient setting, long-term costs were generally
similar between CCTA and stress testing strategies ( 1).
Higher invasive angiography rates after CCTA are
matched by a greater use of downstream stress testing
after initial stress testing, re sulting in minimal differences
in cost at 2 to 3 years of follow-up ( 1,2). From the
CONSERVE (Coronary Computed Tomographic Angiog-raphy for Selective Cardiac Catheterization) trial, 823 pa-tients were randomized to a selective versus directreferral strategy to ICA. Enrollment was limited to pa-tients with nonemergent indications for ICA ( 3). The se-
lective referral arm included CCTA-guided use of ICA.
Cumulative diagnostic costs w ere $1,183 for the selective
arm and $2,755 for the direct referral arm of theC O N S E R V Et r i a l( 5 7 %l o w e rc o s t s ) .I nt h eC C T A - g u i d e darm, follow-up stress testing was applied and contrib-uted to reduced referrals to ICA.
A recent tiered testing strategy was evaluated in both
the CRESCENT I and II trials ( 2,4). From the CRESCENT I
trial, CAC was used as the index test, with follow-up
CCTA used only in patients with detectable CAC or forthose with a high pretest risk ( 2). In this trial, nearly
40% of patients did not undergo CCTA, which reduceddiagnostic evaluation cost s; no events were reported in
this subgroup. By comparison, nearly half of those ran-domized to the exercise ECG had additional con ﬁrma-
tory diagnostic testing. Overall, 1-year costs were
signi ﬁcantly lower in the CAC tiered testing protocol
(16% cost savings; p <0.0001) ( 2). Moreover, 1-year
MACE-free survival was higher in the CAC-guidedt e s t i n ga r m( 9 7 % )c o m p a r e dw i t he x e r c i s eE C G( 9 0 % ;HR: 0.32; p ¼0.011).
5.3.2. Exercise Electrocardiographic Cost-Value Considerations
The economic evidence for the exercise ECG supports that
tiered testing may offset its reduced diagnostic accuracy(1,2). In a decision model, tiered testing of exercise ECG
followed by selective stress echocardiography resulted inimproved diagnostic accuracy and favorable cost-effective ratios when compared with other testing stra-tegies ( 2). In a Medicare cohort, observed 180-day costswere lowest for the exercise ECG when compared with
stress echocardiography, MPI, or CCTA ( 3). Randomized
trial data on cost are available and from the PROMISE trialinitial test costs were $174 for exercise ECG, >50% lower
than that of other imaging procedures ( 4). At 3-years of
follow-up, the mean cost difference was $1,731 higher for
CCTA (n ¼4818) when compared with the exercise ECG
(n¼858); however, the 95% CIs for cost differences was
wide ($2 to $3,519), and there was no overall difference byrandomization ( 4). Overall, results from the PROMISE trial
showed that stress testing was associated with similarc o s t sa n dC A Do u t c o m e so v e r w3y e a r so ff o l l o w - u p( 4,5).
In a randomized trial of 824 symptomatic women, cu-
mulative procedural costs w ere nearly 50% lower for ex-
ercise ECG versus MPI SPECT (p <0.0001), with no
difference in 2-year event-free survival (p ¼
0.59) ( 6).
5.3.3. Stress Echocardiographic Cost-Value Considerations
Several cost-effectiveness models have reported an
increased incremental cost-e ffectiveness ratio for stress
echocardiography, compare d with exercise ECG and other
diagnostic procedures ( 1-4). In these models, cost-
effectiveness was in ﬂuenced by an improved diagnostic
accuracy for stress echocardi ography, which led to longer
life expectancy ( 1). In a recent systematic review, the
evidence supports that stress echocardiography or stress
MPI are cost-effective for those patients at intermediatepretest risk ( 5). The improved CAD detection for exercise
echocardiography resulted in fewer of ﬁce and ED visits
and hospital days, yielding a 20% cost savings whenc o m p a r e dw i t ht h ee x e r c i s eE C G( 6). There were 2,204
patients that underwent stress echocardiography in thePROMISE trial, and 3-year mean costs were similar to that
of CCTA (CCTA –stress echocardiography mean cost dif-
ference: –$363; 95% CI: –$1,562 to $818) ( 7).
5.3.4. Stress Nuclear MPI Cost-Value Considerations
Among intermediate-risk patients, evidence synthesis
supports that stress MPI is a cost-effective test option ( 1).
From the SPARC (Study of Myocardial Perfusion andCoronary Anatomy Imaging Roles in Coronary ArteryDisease) registry, observed 2-year mortality rate wash i g h e s tf o rP E TM P I( 5 . 5 % )c o m p a r e dw i t hC C T A( 0 . 7 % )o rSPECT MPI (1.6%), with 2-year cost highest for patientsundergoing PET ( 2). In the PROMISE trial, nearly two-
thirds of patients underwent stress MPI, and the mean
cost was similar when compared with CCTA ( 3). Mean
costs were also similar in a randomized trial of 457 pa-tients comparing stress MPI with exercise ECG (p >0.05)
(4). Among higher-likelihood patients in the UK enrolled
in the CECaT (Cost Effectiveness of Noninvasive CardiacTesting) trial, MPI SPECT was the most cost-effectiveapproach ( 5).Gulati et al . JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
2021 Chest Pain Guideline NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285e246

5.3.5. Stress CMR Cost-Value Considerations
A synthesis of this cost evidence reveals a pattern
whereby CMR perfusion and scar imaging is associated
with a favorable incremental cost-effectiveness ratio
of<$50,000 per quality-adjusted life years saved ( 1,2).
From a single report, a CMR strategy informed by the CE-MARC trial was more cost-effective than stress MPI,largely because of the higher diagnostic accuracy for CMR(2). However, the most cost-effective strategy was that of
initial exercise ECG followed by selective stress CMR and
invasive angiography; for this tiered testing approach,
additional testing was deemed appropriate in the setting
of abnormal or inconclusive ﬁndings. In a decision model
for intermediate pretest risk patients, a strategy of CMRfollowed by selective ICA had projected reduced costs byw25% when compared with direct referral to ICA ( 2,3).
From the Stress CMR Perfusion Imaging in the UnitedStates registry ( 4), patients with negative ﬁndings for
ischemia and scar had low downstream costs ( 5).
6. EVIDENCE GAPS AND FUTURE RESEARCH
Chest pain is one of the most common symptoms for
which a person seeks medical care, and it should there-fore be the target of substantial research investigation.
1. For patients with ACS, considerable success has been
achieved in reducing door-to-balloon times for STEMI,but little progress has been made in reducing theimportant delays from symptom onset to presentation.Further research is needed to develop approaches toshorten this interval including studies of othermethods of evaluating patients with chest pain using
technologies that permit acquisition and transmission
of ECGs from home and remote evaluations (e.g., tel-ehealth) for those with acute symptoms ( 1,2).
2. An important, increasing patient population includes
women and men with angina and ACS associated withangiographically normal or nonobstructive coronary
arteries ( 3,4). Prognosis is not benign, pathophysiology
has not been clari ﬁed, and optimal therapy is unclear
in these heterogeneous groups, which are now
considered in terms of INOCA ( 5)a n dM I N O C A( 6).
Adequately identifying patients with INOCA, andcompleting an evaluation to make such a diagnosis, isnecessary but often not done, regardless of whetherchest pain is assessed in the ED, inpatient, or outpa-tient setting. Further investigation to clarify diseasemechanisms in these challenging syndromes is needed
to provide the basis for therapeutic advances.
3. One of the initial challenges in the evaluation of pa-
tients with chest pain, either in the emergency or of ﬁcesetting, is symptom classi ﬁcation. Methods to elicit
symptoms and clusters of symptoms that provideimproved pretest probabilities of symptomatic CADmay be aided with machine-le arning algorithms. It is
already clear that some common dogma about chest
pain descriptions, such as differences between men
a n dw o m e n ,m a yn o tb ea sp r e v a l e n ta sh a sb e e nr e -ported ( 7) and may impede care of both sexes if they do
notﬁt preconceived notions of the clinical signi ﬁcance
of their symptoms. However, reducing the differencesin both sex and racial differences in treatment andoutcomes are important future goals of research andclinical care.
4. Clinical risk strati ﬁcation and decision tools will likely
continue to grow in popularity because they areincorporated into electronic health records, but itwould be useful to test them in large randomized trialsto rigorously determine their bene ﬁti nt e r m so f
improved outcomes or lower costs before widespreadimplementation ( 1). hs-cTn assays are now the global
standard of care for identifying myocardial injury,
although questions remain a bout whether minimal el-
evations, which carry prognostic value, are actionablein a manner that improves outcomes. Trials evaluatingvarious medical and procedural strategies would beuseful including diagnostic and therapeutic algorithmsf o rM I N O C A .T h en u m b e ro fp o t e n t i a lq u e s t i o n st h a tcould be addressed will demand innovative trial de-signs to use resources ef ﬁciently and meaningfully.
5. Increasingly, randomized trials will be performed to
determine which diagnostic tests can be eliminatedfrom initial and follow-up care, both to streamlinemanagement algorithms and to decrease health carecosts. In part, this approach will encompass evaluationof where patients with chest pain should be initiallyevaluated and monitored. Comparison of the various
imaging modalities in randomized trials should help
reﬁne test selection and use ( 8).
Thus, the diagnosis and management of chest pain will
remain a fertile area of investigation, with randomizedevaluations complementing insights provided by regis-
tries of patients presenting with chest pain ( 9-12). In the
future, registries will more frequently serve as platformswithin which to conduct randomized trials. Accreditationactivities coupled with registry participation will alsoneed to be evaluated to determine if they not onlyimprove processes of care but also affect clinical end-points ( 12). Assessment of long-term outcomes, patient-
centered metrics, and cost will be integrated into these
studies to enhance the evidence base for care of patients
presenting with chest pain with greater precision.JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021 Gulati et al .
NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285 2021 Chest Pain Guidelinee247

STAFF
American College of Cardiology
D i p t iN .I t c h h a p o r i a ,M D ,F A C C ,P r e s i d e n tCathleen C. Gates, Chief Executive Of ﬁcer
MaryAnne Elma, MPH, Senior Director, Enterprise Content
and Digital Strategy
Timothy W. Schutt, MA, Clinical Practice Guidelines
Analyst
Grace D. Ronan, Team Leader, Clinical Policy Publications
American College of Cardiology/American Heart AssociationThomas S.D. Getchius, Director, Guideline Strategy and
Operations
Abdul R. Abdullah, MD, Director, Guideline Science and
MethodologyHannah Planalp, Guideline Advisor
Zainab Shipchandler, MPH, Guideline AdvisorAmerican Heart AssociationMitchell S.V. Elkind, MD, MS, FAAN, FAHA, PresidentNancy Brown, Chief Executive Of ﬁcer
Mariell Jessup, MD, FAHA, Chief Science and Medical
Ofﬁcer
Radhika Rajgopal Singh, PhD, Senior Vice President,
Ofﬁce of Science and Health
Paul St. Laurent, DNP, RN, Senior Science and
Medicine Advisor, Of ﬁce of Science, Medicine and
Health
Jody Hundley, Production and Operations Manager,
Scienti ﬁc Publications, Of ﬁce of Science
OperationsGulati et al . JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
2021 Chest Pain Guideline NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285e248

REFERENCES
PREAMBLE
1.Institute of Medicine (US) Committee on Standards
for Developing Trustworthy Clinical Practice Guide-lines. Clinical Practice Guidelines We Can Trust. Wash-
ington, DC: National Academies Press. 2011 .
2.Institute of Medicine (US) Committee on Standards
for Systematic Reviews of Comparative Effectiveness
Research. Finding What Works in Health Care: Stan-
dards for Systematic Reviews. Washington, DC: Na-
tional Academies Press. 2011 .
3.Anderson JL, Heidenreich PA, Barnett PG, et al.
ACC/AHA statement on cost/value methodology inclinical practice guidelines and performance measures:a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Perfor-
mance Measures and Task Force on Practice Guide-
lines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;63:2304 –2322 .
4.ACCF/AHA Task Force on Practice Guidelines.
Methodology manual and policies from the ACCF/AHATask Force on Practice Guidelines. American College of
Cardiology and American Heart Association . 2010.
Available at: https://www.acc.org/Guidelines/About-
Guidelines-and-Clinical-Documents/Methodology
andhttps://professional.heart.org/-/media/phd- ﬁles/
guidelines-and-statements/methodology_manual_and_policies_ucm_319826.pdf . Accessed July 26, 2021.
5.Halperin JL, Levine GN, Al-Khatib SM, et al. Further
evolution of the ACC/AHA clinical practice guidelinerecommendation classi ﬁcation system: a report of the
American College of Cardiology/American Heart As-sociation Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2016;67:1572 –1574 .
6.Arnett DK, Goodman RA, Halperin JL, et al. AHA/
ACC/HHS strategies to enhance application of clinical
practice guidelines in patients with cardiovascular
disease and comorbid conditions: from the AmericanHeart Association, American College of Cardiology,and U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;64:1851 –1856 .
7.Levine GN, O ’Gara PT, Beckman JA, et al. Recent
innovations, modi ﬁcations, and evolution of ACC/AHA
Clinical Practice Guidelines: an update for our con-
stituencies: a report of the American College of Car-
diology/American Heart Association Task Force onClinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;73:
1990 –1998 .
1.4. Scope of the Guideline
1.Fihn SD, Blankenship JC, Alexander KP, et al. 2014
ACC/AHA/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS focused update of theguideline for the diagnosis and management of pa-
tients with stable ischemic heart disease: a report of
the American College of Cardiology/American HeartAssociation Task Force on Practice Guidelines, and theAmerican Association for Thoracic Surgery, PreventiveCardiovascular Nurses Association, Society for Cardio-vascular Angiography and Interventions, and Society
of Thoracic Surgeons. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;64:
1929 –1949 .
2.Fihn SD, Gardin JM, Abrams J, et al. 2012 ACCF/
AHA/ACP/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS guideline for the
diagnosis and management of patients with stableischemic heart disease: a report of the American Col-
lege of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Asso-ciation Task Force on Practice Guidelines, and theAmerican College of Physicians, American Associationfor Thoracic Surgery, Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses
Association, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography
and Interventions, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2012;60:e44 –e164 .
3.January CT, Wann LS, Alpert JS, et al. 2014 AHA/
ACC/HRS guideline for the management of patients
with atrial ﬁbrillation: a report of the American College
of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Forceon practice guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;64:e1 –e76.
4.January CT, Wann LS, Calkins H, et al. 2019 AHA/
ACC/HRS focused update of the 2014 AHA/ACC/HRS
guideline for the management of patients with atrialﬁbrillation: a report of the American College of Car-
diology/American Heart Association Task Force onClinical Practice Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm So-ciety. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;74:104 –132.
5.Amsterdam EA, Wenger NK, Brindis RG, et al. 2014
AHA/ACC guideline for the management of patientswith non-ST-elevation acute coronary syndromes: areport of the American College of Cardiology/Amer-ican Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guide-
lines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;64:e139 –e228 .
6.Grundy SM, Stone NJ, Bailey AL, et al. 2018
AHA/ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/ADA/AGS/APhA/ASPC/NLA/PCNA guideline on the management ofblood cholesterol: a report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on
Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;73:
e285 –e350 .
7.Yancy CW, Jessup M, Bozkurt B, et al. 2013 ACCF/
AHA guideline for the management of heart failure: a
report of the American College of Cardiology Foun-
dation/American Heart Association Task Force onpractice guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2013;62:e147 –
e239 .
8.Yancy CW, Jessup M, Bozkurt B, et al. 2017 ACC/
AHA/HFSA focused update of the 2013 ACCF/AHA
guideline for the management of heart failure: a reportof the American College of Cardiology/American HeartAssociation Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelinesand the Heart Failure Society of America. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2017;70:776 –803.
9.Arnett DK, Blumenthal R, Albert M, et al. 2019 ACC/
AHA guideline on the primary prevention of cardio-vascular disease: a report of the American College ofCardiology/American Heart Association Task Force onClinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;74:
e177 –e232 .
10.Jensen MD, Ryan DH, Apovian CM, et al. 2013
AHA/ACC/TOS guideline for the management ofoverweight and obesity in adults: a report of theAmerican College of Cardiology/American Heart As-
sociation Task Force on Practice Guidelines and The
Obesity Society. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;63:2985 –
3023 .
11.O’Gara PT, Kushner FG, Ascheim DD, et al. 2013
ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of ST-
elevation myocardial infarction: a report of the
American College of Cardiology Foundation/AmericanHeart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines.
J Am Coll Cardiol . 2013;61:e78 –e140 .
12.Al-Khatib SM, Stevenson WG, Ackerman MJ, et al.
2017 AHA/ACC/HRS guideline for management ofpatients with ventricular arrhythmias and the preven-tion of sudden cardiac death: a report of the AmericanCollege of Cardiology/American Heart Association
Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines and the
Heart Rhythm Society. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2018;72:e91
–
e220 .
13.Hillis LD, Smith PK, Anderson JL, et al. 2011 ACCF/
AHA guideline for coronary artery bypass graft sur-gery: a report of the American College of CardiologyFoundation/American Heart Association Task Force onPractice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2011;58:e123 –
e210 .
14.Ommen SR, Mital S, Burke MA, et al. 2020 AHA/
ACC guideline for the diagnosis and treatment of pa-
tients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a report ofthe American College of Cardiology/American HeartAssociation Joint Committee on Clinical PracticeGuidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2020;76:e159 –e240 .
15.Levine GN, Bates ER, Blankenship JC, et al. 2011
ACCF/AHA/SCAI guideline for percutaneous coronaryintervention: a report of the American College of
Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association
Task Force on Practice Guidelines and the Society forCardiovascular Angiography and Interventions. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2011;58:e44 –e122 .
16.Levine GN, Bates ER, Blankenship JC, et al. 2015
ACC/AHA/SCAI focused update on primary percuta-neous coronary intervention for patients with ST-elevation myocardial infarction: an update of the
2011 ACCF/AHA/SCAI guideline for percutaneous cor-
onary intervention and the 2013 ACCF/AHA guidelinefor the management of ST-elevation myocardialinfarction. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2016;67:1235 –1250 .
17.Smith SC Jr, Benjamin EJ, Bonow RO, et al. AHA/
ACCF secondary prevention and risk reduction therapyfor patients with coronary and other atheroscleroticvascular disease: 2011 update: a guideline from the
American Heart Association and American College of
Cardiology Foundation. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2011;58:
2432 –2446 .
18.Berg KM, Cheng A, Panchal AR, et al. Part 7: sys-
tems of care: 2020 American Heart Associationguidelines for cardiopulmonary resuscitation andemergency cardiovascular care. Circulation . 2020;142:
S580 –S604 .
19.Panchal AR, Berg KM, Hirsch KG, et al. 2019
American Heart Association focused update on
advanced cardiovascular life support: use of advanced
airways, vasopressors, and extracorporeal cardiopul-monary resuscitation during cardiac arrest: an updateto the American Heart Association Guidelines for Car-diopulmonary Resuscitation and Emergency Cardio-vascular Care. Circulation . 2019;140:e881 –e894 .
20.Whelton PK, Carey RM, Aronow WS, et al.
2017 ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/ASPC/NMA/PCNA Guideline for the prevention,
detection, evaluation, and management of high blood
pressure in adults: a report of the American College ofCardiology/American Heart Association Task Force onClinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2018;71:
e127 –e248 .JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021 Gulati et al .
NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285 2021 Chest Pain Guidelinee249

21.Amsterdam EA, Kirk JD, Bluemke DA, et al. Testing
of low-risk patients presenting to the emergencydepartment with chest pain: a scienti ﬁc statement
from the American Heart Association. Circulation .
2010;122:1756 –1776 .
22.Fox CS, Golden SH, Anderson C, et al. Update on
prevention of cardiovascular disease in adults with
type 2 diabetes mellitus in light of recent evidence: ascienti ﬁc statement from the American Heart Associ-
ation and the American Diabetes Association. Circula-
tion. 2015;132:691 –718.
23.Grohskopf LA, Sokolow LZ, Broder KR, et al.
Prevention and control of seasonal in ﬂuenza with
vaccines: recommendations of the Advisory Com-
mittee on Immunization Practices-United States,
2018-19 In ﬂuenza Season. MMWR Recomm Rep .
2018;67:1 –20.
1.4.1. Scope of the Problem
1.Rui P, Kang K. National Hospital Ambulatory Medical
Care Survey: 2017 emergency department summary ta-bles. National Center for Health Statistics. Available at:
https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nhamcs/web_tables/
2017_ed_web_tables-508.pdf . Accessed February 12,
2021.
2.Rui P, Okeyode T. National Ambulatory Medical
Care Survey: 2016 national summary tables. 2016.Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/ahcd/
namcs_summary/2016_namcs_web_tables.pdf . Accessed
February 12, 2021.
3.Virani SS, Alonso A, Benjamin EJ, et al. Heart disease
and stroke statistics-2020 update: a report from the
American Heart Association. Circulation . 2020;141:
e139 –e596 .
4.Ruigomez A, Rodriguez LA, Wallander MA, et al.
Chest pain in general practice: incidence, comorbidityand mortality. Fam Pract . 2006;23:167 –174.
5.Bosner S, Becker A, Haasenritter J, et al. Chest pain
in primary care: epidemiology and pre-work-up prob-abilities. Eur J Gen Pract . 2009;15:141 –146.
6.Hsia RY, Hale Z, Tabas JA. A national study of the
prevalence of life-threatening diagnoses in patientswith chest pain. JAMA Intern Med . 2016;176:1029 –
1032 .
1.4.2. De ﬁning Chest Pain
1.Canto JG, Rogers WJ, Goldberg RJ, et al. Association
of age and sex with myocardial infarction symptompresentation and in-hospital mortality. JAMA .
2012;307:813 –822
.
2.van der Meer MG, Backus BE, van der Graaf Y, et al.
The diagnostic value of clinical symptoms in women
and men presenting with chest pain at the emergencydepartment, a prospective cohort study. PLoS One .
2015;10:e0116431 .
3.Hemal K, Pagidipati NJ, Coles A, et al. Sex differ-
ences in demographics, risk factors, presentation, andnoninvasive testing in stable outpatients with sus-pected coronary artery disease: insights from the
PROMISE trial. J Am Coll Cardiol Img . 2016;9:337 –346.
4.Lichtman JH, Leifheit EC, Safdar B, et al. Sex dif-
ferences in the presentation and perception of symp-toms among young patients with myocardialinfarction: evidence from the VIRGO Study (Variationin Recovery: Role of Gender on Outcomes of YoungAMI Patients). Circulation . 2018;137:781 –790.5.Bosner S, Haasenritter J, Hani MA, et al. Gender
differences in presentation and diagnosis of chest painin primary care. BMC Fam Pract . 2009;10:79 .
6.Ferry AV, Anand A, Strachan FE, et al. Presenting
symptoms in men and women diagnosed withmyocardial infarction using sex-speci ﬁc criteria. JA m
Heart Assoc . 2019;8:e012307 .
7.Kreatsoulas C, Fleegler EW, Kubzansky LD, et al.
Young adults and adverse childhood events: a potentmeasure of cardiovascular risk. Am J Med . 2019;132:
605 –613.
2. INITIAL EVALUATION
2.1. History
1.Amsterdam EA, Wenger NK, Brindis RG, et al. 2014
AHA/ACC guideline for the management of patientswith non-ST-elevation acute coronary syndromes: a
report of the American College of Cardiology/Amer-
ican Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guide-lines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;64:e139 –e228 .
2.Lindsell CJ, Anantharaman V, Diercks D, et al. The
Internet Tracking Registry of Acute Coronary Syn-dromes (i*trACS): a multicenter registry of patientswith suspicion of acute coronary syndromes reportedusing the standardized reporting guidelines for emer-
gency department chest pain studies. Ann Emerg Med .
2006;48:666 –677, 77 e1 –9.
3.Hsia RY, Hale Z, Tabas JA. A national study of the
prevalence of life-threatening diagnoses in patientswith chest pain. JAMA Intern Med . 2016;176:1029 –
1032 .
4.Fanaroff AC, Rymer JA, Goldstein SA, et al. Does
this patient with chest pain have acute coronary syn-drome?: the rational clinical examination systematicreview. JAMA . 2015;314:1955 –1965 .
5.Diercks DB, Boghos E, Guzman H, et al. Changes in
the numeric descriptive scale for pain after sublingual
nitroglycerin do not predict cardiac etiology of chestpain. Ann Emerg Med . 2005;45:581 –585.
2.1.1. A Focus on the Uniqueness of Chest Pain
in Women
1.Hemal K, Pagidipati NJ, Coles A, et al. Sex differ-
ences in demographics, risk factors, presentation, and
noninvasive testing in stable outpatients with sus-
pected coronary artery disease: insights from thePROMISE trial. J Am Coll Cardiol Img . 2016;9:337 –346.
2.Garcia M, Mulvagh SL, Merz CN, et al. Cardiovas-
cular disease in women: clinical perspectives. Circ Res .
2016;118:1273 –1293 .
3.Lichtman JH, Leifheit EC, Safdar B, et al. Sex dif-
ferences in the presentation and perception of symp-toms among young patients with myocardialinfarction: evidence from the VIRGO Study (Variation
in Recovery: Role of Gender on Outcomes of Young
AMI Patients). Circulation . 2018;137:781 –790.
4.Pelletier R, Khan NA, Cox J, et al. Sex versus
gender-related characteristics: which predictsoutcome after acute coronary syndrome in the young?J Am Coll Cardiol . 2016;67:127 –135.
5.Ferry AV, Anand A, Strachan FE, et al. Presenting
symptoms in men and women diagnosed withmyocardial infarction using sex-speci ﬁc criteria. JA m
Heart Assoc . 2019;8:e012307 .6.Kreatsoulas C, Dinakar D, Mehta S, et al. Machine
learning to evaluate gender differences in typical andatypical angina among patients with obstructive coro-nary artery disease. ESC Congress 2019. Paris, France.
2019
.
7.DeFilippis EM, Collins BL, Singh A, et al. Women
who experience a myocardial infarction at a young age
have worse outcomes compared with men: the MassGeneral Brigham YOUNG-MI registry. Eur Heart J .
2020;41:4127 –4137 .
8.Rui P, Kang K, Ashman JJ. National Hospital Ambu-
latory Medical Care Survey: 2016 Emergency Depart-ment Summary Tables. 2016. Available at: https://www.
cdc.gov/nchs/data/ahcd/nhamcs_emergency/2016_
ed_web_tables.pdf . Accessed July 26, 2021.
9.Reynolds HR, Shaw LJ, Min JK, et al. Association
of sex with severity of coronary artery disease,
ischemia, and symptom burden in patients withmoderate or severe ischemia: secondary analysis ofthe ISCHEMIA randomized clinical trial. JAMA Cardiol .
2020;5:1 –14.
10.Meisel ZF, Armstrong K, Mechem CC, et al.
Inﬂuence of sex on the out-of-hospital management
of chest pain. Acad Emerg Med . 2010;17:80 –87.
11.Khan NA, Daskalopoulou SS, Karp I, et al. Sex dif-
ferences in prodromal symptoms in acute coronary
syndrome in patients aged 55 years or younger. Heart .
2017;103:863 –869.
12.Roger VL, Farkouh ME, Weston SA, et al. Sex dif-
ferences in evaluation and outcome of unstableangina. JAMA . 2000;283:646 –652.
13.McSweeney JC, Cleves MA, Zhao W, et al.
Cluster analysis of women ’s prodromal and
acute myocardial infarction symptoms by race andother characteristics. J Cardiovasc Nurs . 2010;25:311 –
322.
14.Safdar B, Nagurney JT, Anise A, et al. Gender-
speciﬁc research for emergency diagnosis and man-
agement of ischemic heart disease: proceedings fromthe 2014 Academic Emergency Medicine ConsensusConference Cardiovascular Research Workgroup. Acad
Emerg Med . 2014;21:1350 –1360 .
15.Khan NA, Daskalopoulou SS, Karp I, et al. Sex dif-
ferences in acute coronary syndrome symptom pre-sentation in young patients. JAMA Intern Med .
2013;173:1863 –1871.
16.Tamis-Holland JE, Lu J, Korytkowski M, et al. Sex
differences in presentation and outcome among pa-tients with type 2 diabetes and coronary artery diseasetreated with contemporary medical therapy with orwithout prompt revascularization: a report from theBARI 2D Trial (Bypass Angioplasty RevascularizationInvestigation 2 Diabetes). J Am Coll Cardiol . 2013;61:
1767 –1776 .
2.1.2. Considerations for Older Patients With
Chest Pain
1.
Grosmaitre P, Le Vavasseur O, Yachouh E, et al.
Signi ﬁcance of atypical symptoms for the diag-
nosis and management of myocardial infarction in
elderly patients admitted to emergency de-partments. Arch Cardiovasc Dis .2 0 1 3 ; 1 0 6 : 5 8 6 –
592.
2.Jokhadar M, Wenger NK. Review of the treatment of
acute coronary syndrome in elderly patients. Clin
Interv Aging . 2009;4:435 –444.Gulati et al . JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
2021 Chest Pain Guideline NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285e250

3.Gupta R, Munoz R. Evaluation and management of
chest pain in the elderly. Emerg Med Clin North Am .
2016;34:523 –542.
4.Lowenstern A, Alexander KP, Hill CL, et al. Age-
related differences in the noninvasive evaluation forpossible coronary artery disease: insights from theProspective Multicenter Imaging Study for Evaluation
of Chest Pain (PROMISE) Trial. JAMA Cardiol . 2020;5:
193–201.
2.1.3. Considerations for Diverse Patient
Populations With Chest Pain
1.Virani SS, Alonso A, Benjamin EJ, et al. Heart disease
and stroke statistics-2020 update: a report from theAmerican Heart Association. Circulation . 2020;141:
e139 –e596 .
2.DeVon HA, Burke LA, Nelson H, et al. Disparities in
patients presenting to the emergency department with
potential acute coronary syndrome: it matters if you
are Black or White. Heart Lung . 2014;43:270 –277.
3.Alrwisan A, Eworuke E. Are discrepancies in waiting
time for chest pain at emergency departments be-tween African Americans and Whites improving overtime? J Emerg Med . 2016;50:349 –355.
4.Graham G. Racial and ethnic differences in acute
coronary syndrome and myocardial infarction withinthe United States: from demographics to outcomes.Clin Cardiol . 2016;39:299 –306.
5.Lopez L, Wilper AP, Cervantes MC, et al. Racial and
sex differences in emergency department triageassessment and test ordering for chest pain, 1997-
2006. Acad Emerg Med . 2010;17:801 –808.
6.Mozaffarian D, Benjamin EJ, Go AS, et al. Heart
disease and stroke statistics –2015 update: a report
from the American Heart Association. Circulation .
2015;131:e29 –e322 .
7.Olson MB, Kelsey SF, Matthews K, et al. Symptoms,
myocardial ischaemia and quality of life in women:results from the NHLBI-sponsored WISE Study. Eur
Heart J . 2003;24:1506 –1514.
8.Volgman AS, Palaniappan LS, Aggarwal NT, et al.
Atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease in South Asiansin the United States: epidemiology, risk factors, andtreatments: a scienti ﬁc statement from the American
Heart Association. Circulation . 2018;138:e1 –e34.
9.Kendall H, Marley A, Patel JV, et al. Hospital delay
in South Asian patients with acute ST-elevation
myocardial infarction in the UK. Eur J Prev Cardiol
.
2013;20:737 –742.
10.Zaman MJ, Junghans C, Sekhri N, et al. Presenta-
tion of stable angina pectoris among women and
South Asian people. CMAJ . 2008;179:659 –667.
11.King-Shier K, Quan H, Kapral MK, et al. Acute cor-
onary syndromes presentations and care outcomes inwhite, South Asian and Chinese patients: a cohortstudy. BMJ Open . 2019;9.e022479 .
2.1.4. Patient-Centric Considerations
1.Leifheit-Limson EC, D ’Onofrio G, Daneshvar M, et al.
Sex differences in cardiac risk factors, perceived risk,and health care provider discussion of risk and risk
modiﬁcation among young patients with acute
myocardial infarction: the VIRGO Study. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2015;66:1949 –1957 .
2.Mathews R, Peterson ED, Li S, et al. Use of emer-
gency medical service transport among patients withST-segment-elevation myocardial infarction: ﬁndings
from the National Cardiovascular Data Registry AcuteCoronary Treatment Intervention Outcomes NetworkRegistry-Get With The Guidelines. Circulation .
2011;124:154 –163.
3.Becker L, Larsen MP, Eisenberg MS. Incidence of
cardiac arrest during self-transport for chest pain. Ann
Emerg Med . 1996;28:612 –616.
4.Deputy Heart Attack Program with Early Heart
Attack Care Education. Available at: https://dha.acc.
org/. Accessed September 10, 2020.
5.Merchant RM, Topjian AA, Panchal AR, et al. Part 1:
executive summary: 2020 American Heart Association
Guidelines for Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation andEmergency Cardiovascular Care. Circulation . 2020;142:
S337 –S357 .
2.2. Physical Examination
1.Fanaroff AC, Rymer JA, Goldstein SA, et al. Does this
patient with chest pain have acute coronary syn-drome?: the rational clinical examination systematicreview. JAMA . 2015;314:1955 –1965 .
2.McConaghy JR, Oza RS. Outpatient diagnosis of
acute chest pain in adults. Am Fam Physician . 2013;87:
177–182.
3.Ohle R, Um J, Anjum O, et al. High risk clinical
features for acute aortic dissection: a case-control
study. Acad Emerg Med . 2018;25:378 –387.
4.Garas G, Zarogoulidis P, Efthymiou A, et al. Spon-
taneous esophageal rupture as the underlying cause ofpneumothorax: early recognition is crucial. J Thorac
Dis. 2014;6:1655 –1658 .
5.Grani C, Senn O, Bischof M, et al. Diagnostic per-
formance of reproducible chest wall tenderness to ruleout acute coronary syndrome in acute chest pain: aprospective diagnostic study. BMJ Open . 2015;5:
e007442 .
6.Panju AA, Hemmelgarn BR, Guyatt GH, et al. The
rational clinical examination. Is this patient having amyocardial infarction? JAMA . 1998;280:1256 –1263 .
7.Perrier A, Desmarais S, Miron MJ, et al. Non-invasive
diagnosis of venous thromboembolism in outpatients.Lancet . 1999;353:190 –195.
8.Tsai TT, Trimarchi S, Nienaber CA. Acute aortic
dissection: perspectives from the International Regis-
try of Acute Aortic Dissection (IRAD). Eur J Vasc
Endovasc Surg . 2009;37:149 –159.
9.von Kodolitsch Y, Schwartz AG, Nienaber CA. Clin-
ical prediction of acute aortic dissection. Arch Intern
Med. 2000;160:2977 –2982 .
10.Klompas M. Does this patient have an acute
thoracic aortic dissection? JAMA . 2002;287:2262 –
2272 .
2.3. Diagnostic Testing
2.3.1. Setting Considerations
1.Diercks DB, Kontos MC, Chen AY, et al. Utilization
and impact of pre-hospital electrocardiograms for
patients with acute ST-segment elevation myocardial
infarction: data from the NCDR (National Cardiovas-cular Data Registry) ACTION (Acute Coronary Treat-ment and Intervention Outcomes Network) Registry.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2009;53:161 –166.
2.Puymirat E, Simon T, Steg PG, et al. Association of
changes in clinical characteristics and managementwith improvement in survival among patients with ST-
elevation myocardial infarction. JAMA . 2012;308:998 –
1006 .
3.Jollis JG, Granger CB, Henry TD, et al. Systems of
care for ST-segment-elevation myocardial infarction: a
report from the American Heart Association ’s Mission:
Lifeline. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes . 2012;5:423 –
428.
4.Postma S, Bergmeijer T, ten Berg J, et al. Pre-hos-
pital diagnosis, triage and treatment in patients withST elevation myocardial infarction. Heart . 2012;98:
1674 –1678 .
5.
Patel M, Dunford JV, Aguilar S, et al. Pre-hospital
electrocardiography by emergency medical personnel:
effects on scene and transport times for chest pain and
ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction patients.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2012;60:806 –811.
6.O’Gara PT, Kushner FG, Ascheim DD, et al. 2013
ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of ST-elevation myocardial infarction: a report of theAmerican College of Cardiology Foundation/American
Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines.
J Am Coll Cardiol . 2013;61:e78 –e140 .
7.Amsterdam EA, Wenger NK, Brindis RG, et al.
2014 AHA/ACC guideline for the management ofpatients with non-ST-elevation acute coronary syn-dromes: a report of the American College of Cardi-ology/American Heart Association Task Force onPractice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;64:e139 –
e228 .
8.Neumann JT, Twerenbold R, Ojeda F, et al. Appli-
cation of high-sensitivity troponin in suspectedmyocardial infarction. N Engl J Med . 2019;380:2529 –
2540 .
9.Thygesen K, Alpert JS, Jaffe AS, et al. Fourth uni-
versal de ﬁnition of myocardial infarction (2018). JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2018;72:2231 –2264 .
10.Becker L, Larsen MP, Eisenberg MS. Incidence of
cardiac arrest during self-transport for chest pain. Ann
Emerg Med . 1996;28:612 –616.
11.Hsiao CJ, Cherry DK, Beatty PC, et al. National
ambulatory medical care survey: 2007 summary. Natl
Health Stat Report . 2010:1 –32.
2.3.2. Electrocardiogram
1.Amsterdam EA, Wenger NK, Brindis RG, et al. 2014
AHA/ACC guideline for the management of patients
with non-ST-elevation acute coronary syndromes: areport of the American College of Cardiology/Amer-ican Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guide-lines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;64:e139 –e228 .
2.O’Gara PT, Kushner FG, Ascheim DD, et al. 2013
ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of ST-elevation myocardial infarction: a report of the
American College of Cardiology Foundation/American
Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2013;61:e78 –e140 .
3.Vogiatzis I, Koulouris E, Ioannidis A, et al. The
importance of the 15-lead versus 12-lead ECG re-cordings in the diagnosis and treatment of rightventricle and left ventricle posterior and lateral wall
acute myocardial infarctions. Acta Inform Med .
2019;27:35 –39.
4.Ashida T, Tani S, Nagao K, et al. Usefulness of
synthesized 18-lead electrocardiography in theJACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021 Gulati et al .
NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285 2021 Chest Pain Guidelinee251

diagnosis of ST-elevation myocardial infarction: a pilot
study. Am J Emerg Med . 2017;35:448 –457.
5.Matetzky S, Freimark D, Feinberg MS, et al. Acute
myocardial infarction with isolated ST-segmentelevation in posterior chest leads V7-9: “hidden ”ST-
segment elevations revealing acute posterior infarc-
tion. J Am Coll Cardiol . 1999;34:748 –753.
6.Jain S, Ting HT, Bell M, et al. Utility of left bundle
branch block as a diagnostic criterion for acutemyocardial infarction. Am J Cardiol . 2011;107:1111 –
1116.
7.Ohlsson M, Ohlin H, Wallerstedt SM, et al. Useful-
ness of serial electrocardiograms for diagnosis of acutemyocardial infarction. Am J Cardiol . 2001;88:478 –481.
8.Mant J, McManus RJ, Oakes RA, et al. Systematic
review and modelling of the investigation of acute andchronic chest pain presenting in primary care. Health
Technol Assess . 2004;8(iii):1 –158.
9.Chase M, Brown AM, Robey JL, et al. Prognostic
value of symptoms during a normal or nonspeci ﬁc
electrocardiogram in emergency department patientswith potential acute coronary syndrome. Acad Emerg
Med. 2006;13:1034 –1039 .
10.Turnipseed SD, Trythall WS, Diercks DB, et al.
Frequency of acute coronary syndrome in patients withnormal electrocardiogram performed during presenceor absence of chest pain. Acad Emerg Med . 2009;16:
495 –499.
11.Pasceri V, Cian ﬂone D, Finocchiaro ML, et al.
Relation between myocardial infarction site and painlocation in Q-wave acute myocardial infarction. Am J
Cardiol . 1995;75:224 –227.
12.Pope JH, Aufderheide TP, Ruthazer R, et al. Missed
diagnoses of acute cardiac ischemia in the emergencydepartment. N Engl J Med . 2000;342:1163 –1170 .
13.McCarthy BD, Beshansky JR, D ’Agostino RB, et al.
Missed diagnoses of acute myocardial infarction in theemergency department: results from a multicenter
study. Ann Emerg Med . 1993;22:579 –582.
14.Canto JG, Fincher C, Kiefe CI, et al. Atypical pre-
sentations among Medicare bene ﬁ
ciaries with unstable
angina pectoris. Am J Cardiol . 2002;90:248 –253.
15.Savonitto S, Ardissino D, Granger CB, et al. Prog-
nostic value of the admission electrocardiogram inacute coronary syndromes. JAMA . 1999;281:707 –713.
16.Rouan GW, Lee TH, Cook EF, et al. Clinical
characteristics and outcome of acute myocardialinfarction in patients with initially normal ornonspeci ﬁc electrocardiograms (a report from the
Multicenter Chest Pain Study). Am J Cardiol .
1989;64:1087 –1092 .
17.Slater DK, Hlatky MA, Mark DB, et al. Outcome in
suspected acute myocardial infarction with normal orminimally abnormal admission electrocardiographicﬁndings. Am J Cardiol . 1987;60:766 –770.
18.Fesmire FM. Which chest pain patients potentially
beneﬁt from continuous 12-lead ST-segment moni-
toring with automated serial ECG? Am J Emerg Med .
2000;18:773 –778.
19.Fesmire FM, Percy RF, Bardoner JB, et al. Useful-
ness of automated serial 12-lead ECG monitoring
during the initial emergency department evaluation
of patients with chest pain. Ann Emerg Med . 1998;31:
3–11.20.Challa PK, Smith KM, Conti CR. Initial presenting
electrocardiogram as determinant for hospital admis-sion in patients presenting to the emergency depart-ment with chest pain: a pilot investigation. Clin Cardiol .
2007;30:558 –561.
21.Thygesen K, Alpert JS, Jaffe AS, et al. Fourth uni-
versal de ﬁnition of myocardial infarction (2018). JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2018;72:2231 –2264 .
22.Levine GN, Bates ER, Blankenship JC, et al. 2015
ACC/AHA/SCAI focused update on primary percuta-neous coronary intervention for patients with ST-elevation myocardial infarction: an update of the2011 ACCF/AHA/SCAI guideline for percutaneous cor-onary intervention and the 2013 ACCF/AHA guideline
for the management of ST-elevation myocardial
infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2016;67:1235 –1250 .
2.3.3. Chest Radiography
1.Hess EP, Perry JJ, Ladouceur P, et al. Derivation of a
clinical decision rule for chest radiography in emer-gency department patients with chest pain andpossible acute coronary syndrome. CJEM . 2010;12:
128–134.
2.Amsterdam EA, Wenger NK, Brindis RG, et al. 2014
AHA/ACC guideline for the management of patients
with non-ST-elevation acute coronary syndromes: areport of the American College of Cardiology/Amer-ican Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guide-lines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;64:e139 –e228 .
3.Yancy CW, Jessup M, Bozkurt B, et al. 2013 ACCF/
AHA guideline for the management of heart failure: areport of the American College of Cardiology Foun-
dation/American Heart Association Task Force on
Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2013;62:e147 –
e239 .
4.Harris KM, Strauss CE, Eagle KA, et al. Correlates of
delayed recognition and treatment of acute type Aaortic dissection: the International Registry of AcuteAortic Dissection (IRAD). Circulation . 2011;124:1911 –
1918 .
2.3.4. Biomarkers
1.Apple FS, Jesse RL, Newby LK, et al. National
academy of clinical biochemistry and IFCC committeefor standardization of markers of cardiac damagelaboratory medicine practice guidelines: analytical is-sues for biochemical markers of acute coronary syn-
dromes. Circulation . 2007;115:e352 –e355 .
2.Bandstein N, Ljung R, Johansson M, et al. Unde-
tectable high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T level in theemergency department and risk of myocardial infarc-tion. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;63:2569 –2578 .
3.Body R, Burrows G, Carley S, et al. High-sensitivity
cardiac troponin t concentrations below the limit ofdetection to exclude acute myocardial infarction: aprospective evaluation. Clin Chem . 2015;61:983 –989.
4.Body R, Carley S, McDowell G, et al. Rapid exclusion
of acute myocardial infarction in patients with unde-
tectable troponin using a high-sensitivity assay. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2011;58:1332 –1339 .
5.Boeddinghaus J, Nestelberger T, Twerenbold R,
et al. Direct comparison of 4 very early rule-out stra-tegies for acute myocardial infarction using high-sensitivity cardiac troponin I. Circulation . 2017;135:
1597 –1611.6.Chapman AR, Anand A, Boeddinghaus J, et al.
Comparison of the ef ﬁcacy and safety of early rule-out
pathways for acute myocardial infarction. Circulation .
2017;135:1586 –1596 .
7.de Lemos JA, Morrow DA, deFilippi CR. Highly
sensitive troponin assays and the cardiology commu-
nity: a love/hate relationship? Clin Chem . 2011;57:826 –
829.
8.Jaffe AS, Apple FS, Morrow DA, et al. Being rational
about (im)precision: a statement from the Biochem-istry Subcommittee of the Joint European Society ofCardiology/American College of Cardiology Founda-tion/American Heart Association/World Heart Federa-tion Task Force for the De ﬁnition of Myocardial
Infarction. Clin Chem . 2010;56:941 –943
.
9.Morrow DA, Cannon CP, Jesse RL, et al. National
academy of clinical biochemistry laboratory medicine
practice guidelines: clinical characteristics and utiliza-tion of biochemical markers in acute coronary syn-dromes. Circulation . 2007;115:e356 –e375 .
10.Mueller C, Giannitsis E, Christ M, et al. Multicenter
evaluation of a 0-hour/1-hour algorithm in the diag-nosis of myocardial infarction with high-sensitivitycardiac troponin T. Ann Emerg Med . 2016;68:76 –87,
e4.
11.Odqvist M, Andersson PO, Tygesen H, et al. High-
sensitivity troponins and outcomes after myocardialinfarction. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2018;71:2616 –2624 .
12.Peacock WF, Baumann BM, Bruton D, et al. Ef ﬁcacy
of high-sensitivity troponin T in identifying very-low-risk patients with possible acute coronary syndrome.JAMA Cardiol . 2018;3:104 –111.
13.Reichlin T, Schindler C, Drexler B, et al. One-hour
rule-out and rule-in of acute myocardial infarctionusing high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T. Arch Intern
Med. 2012;172:1211 –1218 .
14.Reichlin T, Twerenbold R, Maushart C, et al. Risk
strati ﬁcation in patients with unstable angina using
absolute serial changes of 3 high-sensitive troponinassays. Am Heart J . 2013;165:371 –378.e3 .
15.Rubini Gimenez M, Hoeller R, Reichlin T, et al.
Rapid rule out of acute myocardial infarction usingundetectable levels of high-sensitivity cardiactroponin. Int J Cardiol . 2013;168:3896 –3901 .
16.Rubini Gimenez M, Twerenbold R, Jaeger C, et al.
One-hour rule-in and rule-out of acute myocardial
infarction using high-sensitivity cardiac troponin I. Am
J Med . 2015;128:861 –870, e4 .
17.Twerenbold R, Boeddinghaus J, Nestelberger T,
et al. Clinical use of high-sensitivity cardiac troponin inpatients with suspected myocardial infarction. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2017;70:996 –1012 .
18.Twerenbold R, Neumann JT, Sorensen NA, et al.
Prospective validation of the 0/1-h algorithm for earlydiagnosis of myocardial infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2018;72:620 –632.
19.Wildi K, Nelles B, Twerenbold R, et al. Safety and
efﬁcacy of the 0 h/3 h protocol for rapid rule out of
myocardial infarction. Am Heart J . 2016;181:16 –
25.
20.Zhelev Z, Hyde C, Youngman E, et al. Diagnostic
accuracy of single baseline measurement of ElecsysTroponin T high-sensitive assay for diagnosis of acutemyocardial infarction in emergency department: sys-tematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ. 2015;350:h15 .Gulati et al . JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
2021 Chest Pain Guideline NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285e252

21.Thygesen K, Alpert JS, Jaffe AS, et al. Fourth uni-
versal de ﬁnition of myocardial infarction (2018). JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2018;72:2231 –2264 .
22.Cullen L, Mueller C, Parsonage WA, et al. Valida-
tion of high-sensitivity troponin I in a 2-hour diag-
nostic strategy to assess 30-day outcomes in
emergency department patients with possible acutecoronary syndrome. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2013;62:1242 –
1249 .
23.Lipinski MJ, Baker NC, Escarcega RO, et al. Com-
parison of conventional and high-sensitivity troponinin patients with chest pain: a collaborative meta-analysis. Am Heart J . 2015;169:6 –16, e6 .
24.Twerenbold R, Wildi K, Jaeger C, et al. Optimal
cutoff levels of more sensitive cardiac troponin assays
for the early diagnosis of myocardial infarction in pa-tients with renal dysfunction. Circulation . 2015;131:
2041 –2050 .
25.van Wijk S, Jacobs L, Eurlings LW, et al. Troponin T
measurements by high-sensitivity vs conventional as-says for risk strati ﬁcation in acute dyspnea. Clin Chem .
2012;58:284 –292.
26.Neumann JT, Twerenbold R, Ojeda F, et al. Appli-
cation of high-sensitivity troponin in suspectedmyocardial infarction. N Engl J Med . 2019;380:2529 –
2540 .
27.Aviles RJ, Wright RS, Aviles JM, et al. Long-term
prognosis of patients with clinical unstable anginapectoris without elevation of creatine kinase but withelevation of cardiac troponin I levels. Am J Cardiol .
2002;90:875 –878.
28.Eggers KM, Oldgren J, Nordenskjold A, et al.
Diagnostic value of serial measurement of cardiacmarkers in patients with chest pain: limited value ofadding myoglobin to troponin I for exclusion ofmyocardial infarction. Am Heart J . 2004;148:574 –581.
29.Kavsak PA, MacRae AR, Newman AM, et al. Effects
of contemporary troponin assay sensitivity on the
utility of the early markers myoglobin and CKMB iso-
forms in evaluating patients with possible acutemyocardial infarction. Clin Chim Acta . 2007;380:213 –
216.
30.Kontos MC, de Lemos JA, Ou FS, et al. Troponin-
positive, MB-negative patients with non-ST-elevationmyocardial infarction: an undertreated but high-riskpatient group: results from the National Cardiovascu-
lar Data Registry Acute Coronary Treatment and
Intervention Outcomes Network-Get With The Guide-lines (NCDR ACTION-GWTG) Registry. Am Heart J .
2010;160:819 –825.
31.Newby LK, Roe MT, Chen AY, et al. Frequency and
clinical implications of discordant creatine kinase-MBand troponin measurements in acute coronary syn-
dromes. J Am Coll Cardiol
. 2006;47:312 –318.
32.Volz KA, McGillicuddy DC, Horowitz GL, et al.
Creatine kinase-MB does not add additional bene ﬁtt o
a negative troponin in the evaluation of chest pain. Am
J Emerg Med . 2012;30:188 –190.
33.Reichlin T, Twerenbold R, Wildi K, et al. Prospec-
tive validation of a 1-hour algorithm to rule-out andrule-in acute myocardial infarction using a high-
sensitivity cardiac troponin T assay. CMAJ . 2015;187:
E243 –E252 .
34.Shah AS, Grif ﬁths M, Lee KK, et al. High sensitivity
cardiac troponin and the under-diagnosis ofmyocardial infarction in women: prospective cohort
study. BMJ. 2015;350:g7873 .
35.Morrow DA. The Fourth Universal De ﬁnition of
Myocardial Infarction and the Emerging Importance ofMyocardial Injury. Circulation . 2020;141:172 –175.
3. CARDIAC TESTING GENERAL
CONSIDERATIONS
1.Wolk MJ, Bailey SR, Doherty JU, et al. ACCF/AHA/
ASE/ASNC/HFSA/HRS/SCAI/SCCT/SCMR/STS 2013multimodality appropriate use criteria for the detec-
tion and risk assessment of stable ischemic heart dis-
ease: a report of the American College of CardiologyFoundation Appropriate Use Criteria Task Force,American Heart Association, American Society ofEchocardiography, American Society of Nuclear Car-diology, Heart Failure Society of America, Heart
Rhythm Society, Society for Cardiovascular Angiog-
raphy and Interventions, Society of CardiovascularComputed Tomography, Society for CardiovascularMagnetic Resonance, and Society of Thoracic Sur-geons. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;63:380 –406.
2.Medicare Program: Changes to Hospital Outpatient
Prospective Payment and Ambulatory Surgical CenterPayment Systems and Quality Reporting Programs;Revisions of Organ Procurement Organizations Condi-tions of Coverage; Prior Authorization Process and
Requirements for Certain Covered Outpatient Depart-
ment Services; Potential Changes to the LaboratoryDate of Service Policy; Changes to GrandfatheredChildren ’s Hospitals-Within-Hospitals; Notice of
Closure of Two Teaching Hospitals and Opportunity ToApply for Available Slots. Available at: https://www.
cms.gov/Medicare/Medicare-Fee-for-Service-Payment/
HospitalOutpatientPPS/Hospita l-Outpatient-Regulations-
and-Notices-Items/CMS-1717-FC . Accessed September
14, 2020.
3.1. Anatomic Testing
3.1.1. Coronary Computed Tomography
Angiography
1.Gaur S, Ovrehus KA, Dey D, et al. Coronary plaque
quanti ﬁcation and fractional ﬂow reserve by coronary
computed tomography angiography identifyischaemia-causing lesions. Eur Heart J . 2016;37:1220 –
1227 .
2.Ferencik M, Mayrhofer T, Bittner DO, et al. Use of
high-risk coronary atherosclerotic plaque detection forrisk strati ﬁcation of patients with stable chest pain: a
secondary analysis of the PROMISE randomized clinicaltrial. JAMA Cardiol . 2018;3:144 –152.
3.Budoff MJ, Mayrhofer T, Ferencik M, et al. Prog-
nostic value of coronary artery calcium in the PROMISEStudy (Prospective Multicenter Imaging Study forEvaluation of Chest Pain). Circulation . 2017;136:1993 –
2005 .
4.Ferencik M, Mayrhofer T, Puchner SB, et al.
Computed tomography-based high-risk coronary pla-que score to predict acute coronary syndrome among
patients with acute chest pain –Results from the
ROMICAT II trial. J Cardiovasc Comput Tomogr . 2015;9:
538–545.
5.Puchner SB, Liu T, Mayrhofer T, et al. High-risk
plaque detected on coronary CT angiography predicts
acute coronary syndromes independent of signi ﬁcantstenosis in acute chest pain: results from the
ROMICAT-II trial. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;64:684 –692.
6.Motoyama S, Ito H, Sarai M, et al. Plaque character-
ization by coronary computed tomography angiographyand the likelihood of acute coronary events in mid-termfollow-up. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2015;66:337 –346.
7.Motoyama S, Kondo T, Sarai M, et al. Multislice
computed tomographic characteristics of coronary le-
sions in acute coronary syndromes. J Am Coll Cardiol
.
2007;50:319 –326.
8.Motoyama S, Sarai M, Harigaya H, et al. Computed
tomographic angiography characteristics of athero-
sclerotic plaques subsequently resulting in acute cor-onary syndrome. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2009;54:49 –57.
9.Nørgaard BL, Fairbairn TA, Sa ﬁan RD, et al. Coro-
nary CT angiography-derived fractional ﬂow reserve
testing in patients with stable coronary artery disease:recommendations on interpretation and reportingradiology. Radiology: Cardiothoracic Imaging . 2019;1:
e190050 .
10.Stocker TJ, Deseive S, Leipsic J, et al. Reduction in
radiation exposure in cardiovascular computed to-
mography imaging: results from the PROspectivemulticenter registry on radiaTion dose Estimates ofcardiac CT angIOgraphy iN daily practice in 2017(PROTECTION VI). Eur Heart J . 2018;39:3715 –3723 .
3.1.2. Invasive Coronary Angiography
1.Fihn SD, Gardin JM, Abrams J, et al. 2012 ACCF/
AHA/ACP/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS guideline for the
diagnosis and management of patients with stable
ischemic heart disease: a report of the American Col-lege of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Asso-ciation Task Force on Practice Guidelines, and theAmerican College of Physicians, American Associationfor Thoracic Surgery, Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses
Association, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography
and Interventions, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2012;60:e44 –e164 .
2.Amsterdam EA, Wenger NK, Brindis RG, et al. 2014
AHA/ACC guideline for the management of patientswith non-ST-elevation acute coronary syndromes: areport of the American College of Cardiology/Amer-ican Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guide-lines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;64:e139 –e228 .
3.Kobayashi T, Hirshfeld JW Jr. Radiation exposure in
cardiac catheterization: operator behavior matters. Circ
Cardiovasc Interv . 2017;10:e005689 .
4.Georges JL, Karam N, Taf ﬂet M, et al. Time-course
reduction in patient exposure to radiation from coro-
nary interventional procedures: the Greater Paris AreaPercutaneous Coronary Intervention Registry. Circ
Cardiovasc Interv . 2017;10:e005268 .
5.Ford TJ, Corcoran D, Berry C. Stable coronary syn-
dromes: pathophysiology, diagnostic advances andtherapeutic need. Heart . 2018;104:284 –292.
6.Taqueti VR, Shaw LJ, Cook NR, et al. Excess car-
diovascular risk in women relative to men referred forcoronary angiography is associated with severelyimpaired coronary ﬂow reserve, not obstructive dis-
ease. Circulation . 2017;135:566 –577.
7.Ong P, Camici PG, Beltrame JF, et al. International
standardization of diagnostic criteria for microvascular
angina. Int J Cardiol . 2018;250:16 –20.
8.
Ford TJ, Stanley B, Good R, et al. Strati ﬁed medical
therapy using invasive coronary function testing inJACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021 Gulati et al .
NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285 2021 Chest Pain Guidelinee253

angina: the CorMicA Trial. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2018;72:
2841 –2855 .
3.2. Diagnostic Testing
3.2.1. Exercise ECG
1.Amsterdam EA, Kirk JD, Bluemke DA, et al. Testing
of low-risk patients presenting to the emergency
department with chest pain: a scienti ﬁc statement
from the American Heart Association. Circulation .
2010;122:1756 –1776 .
2.Fihn SD, Gardin JM, Abrams J, et al. 2012 ACCF/
AHA/ACP/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS guideline for thediagnosis and management of patients with stableischemic heart disease: a report of the American Col-lege of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Asso-ciation Task Force on Practice Guidelines, and the
American College of Physicians, American Association
for Thoracic Surgery, Preventive Cardiovascular NursesAssociation, Society for Cardiovascular Angiographyand Interventions, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2012;60:e44 –e164 .
3.2.2. Echocardiography/Stress Echocardiography
1.RofﬁM, Patrono C, Collet JP, et al. 2015 ESC
guidelines for the management of acute coronary
syndromes in patients presenting without persistent
ST-segment elevation: Task Force for the Managementof Acute Coronary Syndromes in Patients PresentingWithout Persistent ST-Segment Elevation of the Eu-ropean Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J .
2016;37:267 –315.
2.Amsterdam EA, Wenger NK, Brindis RG, et al. 2014
AHA/ACC guideline for the management of patientswith non-ST-elevation acute coronary syndromes: areport of the American College of Cardiology/Amer-
ican Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guide-
lines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;64:e139 –e228 .
3.Pellikka PA, Arruda-Olson A, Chaudhry FA, et al.
Guidelines for performance, interpretation, and appli-
cation of stress echocardiography in ischemic heartdisease: from the American Society of Echocardiogra-phy. J Am Soc Echocardiogr . 2020;33:1 –41.e8 .
4.Cortigiani L, Ciampi Q, Rigo F, et al. Prognostic
value of dual imaging stress echocardiographyfollowing coronary bypass surgery. Int J Cardiol .
2019;277:266 –271.
5.Cortigiani L, Rigo F, Bovenzi F, et al. The prognostic
value of coronary ﬂow velocity reserve in two coronary
arteries during vasodilator stress echocardiography.J Am Soc Echocardiogr . 2019;32:81 –91.
6.Cortigiani L, Ciampi Q, Lombardo A, et al. Age- and
gender-speci ﬁc prognostic cutoff values of coronary
ﬂow velocity reserve in vasodilator stress echocardi-
ography. J Am Soc Echocardiogr . 2019;32:1307 –1317.
3.2.3. Stress Nuclear (PET or SPECT) Myocardial
Perfusion Imaging
1.Fihn SD, Gardin JM, Abrams J, et al. 2012 ACCF/
AHA/ACP/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS guideline for the
diagnosis and management of patients with stableischemic heart disease: a report of the American Col-lege of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Asso-ciation Task Force on Practice Guidelines, and theAmerican College of Physicians, American Association
for Thoracic Surgery, Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses
Association, Society for Cardiovascular Angiographyand Interventions, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons.
J Am Coll Cardiol . 2012;60:e44 –e164 .
2.Shaw LJ, Hage FG, Berman DS, et al. Prognosis in
the era of comparative effectiveness research: where isnuclear cardiology now and where should it be? J Nucl
Cardiol . 2012;19:1026 –1043 .
3.Green R, Cantoni V, Petretta M, et al. Negative
predictive value of stress myocardial perfusion imagingand coronary computed tomography angiography: ameta-analysis. J Nucl Cardiol . 2017 .
4.Rozanski A, Gransar H, Min JK, et al. Long-term
mortality following normal exercise myocardialperfusion SPECT according to coronary disease riskfactors. J Nucl Cardiol . 2014;21:341 –350.
5.Metz LD, Beattie M, Hom R, et al. The prognostic
value of normal exercise myocardial perfusion imaging
and exercise echocardiography: a meta-analysis. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2007;49:227 –237.
6.Dorbala S, Di Carli MF, Beanlands RS, et al. Prog-
nostic value of stress myocardial perfusion positronemission tomography: results from a multicenterobservational registry. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2013;61:176 –
184.
7.Kay J, Dorbala S, Goyal A, et al. In ﬂuence of sex on
risk strati ﬁcation with stress myocardial perfusion Rb-
82 positron emission tomography: results from thePET (Positron Emission Tomography) PrognosisMulticenter Registry. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2013;62:1866 –
1876 .
8.Shaw LJ, Cerqueira MD, Brooks MM, et al. Impact
of left ventricular function and the extent of
ischemia and scar by stress myocardial perfusion
imaging on prognosis and therapeutic risk reductionin diabetic patients with coronary artery disease:results from the Bypass Angioplasty Revasculariza-tion Investigation 2 Diabetes (BARI 2D) trial. J Nucl
Cardiol . 2012;19:658 –669.
9.Gould KL, Johnson NP, Bateman TM, et al. Anatomic
versus physiologic assessment of coronary artery dis-
ease. Role of coronary ﬂow reserve, fractional ﬂow
reserve, and positron emission tomography imaging inrevascularization decision-making. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2013;62:1639 –1653 .
10.Dilsizian V, Bacharach SL, Beanlands RS, et al.
ASNC imaging guidelines/SNMMI procedure standardfor positron emission tomography (PET) nuclear car-
diology procedures. J Nucl Cardiol . 2016;23:1187 –1226 .
11.Taqueti VR, Solomon SD, Shah AM, et al. Coronary
microvascular dysfunction and future risk of heart
failure with preserved ejection fraction. Eur Heart J .
2018;39:840 –849.
12.Taqueti VR, Shaw LJ, Cook NR, et al. Excess car-
diovascular risk in women relative to men referred forcoronary angiography is associated with severely
impaired coronary ﬂow reserve, not obstructive dis-
ease. Circulation . 2017;135:566 –577.
13.Taqueti VR, Hachamovitch R, Murthy VL, et al.
Global coronary ﬂow reserve is associated with
adverse cardiovascular events independently ofluminal angiographic severity and modi ﬁes the ef-
fect of early revascularization. Circulation . 2015;131:
19–27.
14.Taqueti VR, Everett BM, Murthy VL, et al. Inter-
action of impaired coronary ﬂow reserve and car-
diomyocyte injury on adverse cardiovascular outcomesin patients without overt coronary artery disease. Cir-
culation . 2015;131:528 –535.
15.Einstein AJ, Berman DS, Min JK, et al. Patient-
centered imaging: shared decision making for cardiac
imaging procedures with exposure to ionizing radia-tion. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;63:1480 –1489 .
16.Einstein AJ. Effects of radiation exposure from
cardiac imaging: how good are the data? J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2012;59:553 –565.
17.Fazel R, Gerber TC, Balter S, et al. Approaches to
enhancing radiation safety in cardiovascular imaging: ascienti ﬁc statement from the American Heart Associ-
ation. Circulation . 2014;130:1730 –1748 .
3.2.4. Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance
Imaging
1.Henzlova MJ, Duvall WL, Einstein AJ, et al. ASNC
imaging guidelines for SPECT nuclear cardiology pro-
cedures: stress, protocols, and tracers. J Nucl Cardiol .
2016;23:606 –639.
2.Senior R, Becher H, Monaghan M, et al. Contrast
echocardiography: evidence-based recommendations
by European Association of Echocardiography. Eur J
Echocardiogr . 2009;10:194 –212.
3.Patil HR, Main M. Revisiting the safety pro ﬁ
le of
echocardiography contrast agents. Available at: https://
www.acc.org/latest-in-cardiology/articles/2016/06/23/
08/23/revisiting-the-safety-pro ﬁle-of-echocardiography-
contrast-agents . Accessed August 16, 2020.
4.Porter TR, Abdelmoneim S, Belcik JT, et al. Guide-
lines for the cardiac sonographer in the performance of
contrast echocardiography: a focused update from the
American Society of Echocardiography. J Am Soc
Echocardiogr . 2014;27:797 –810.
5.Pellikka PA, Arruda-Olson A, Chaudhry FA, et al.
Guidelines for performance, interpretation, and appli-
cation of stress echocardiography in ischemic heart
disease: from the American Society of Echocardiogra-phy. J Am Soc Echocardiogr . 2020;33:1 –41.e8 .
6.Kramer CM, Barkhausen J, Bucciarelli-Ducci C, et al.
Standardized cardiovascular magnetic resonance im-
aging (CMR) protocols: 2020 update. J Cardiovasc
Magn Reson . 2020;22:17 .
7.Narula J, Chandrashekhar Y, Ahmadi A, et al. SCCT
2021 Expert consensus document on coronarycomputed tomographic angiography: a report of the
Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography.
J Cardiovasc Comput Tomogr . 2021;15:192 –217.
8.Gibbons RJ, Balady GJ, Beasley JW, et al. ACC/AHA
Guidelines for exercise testing. a report of the Amer-ican College of Cardiology/American Heart Association
Task Force on Practice Guidelines (Committee on Ex-
ercise Testing). J Am Coll Cardiol . 1997;30:260 –311.
9.Fletcher GF, Ades PA, Klig ﬁeld P, et al. Exercise
standards for testing and training: a scienti ﬁc state-
ment from the American Heart Association. Circulation .
2013;128:873 –934.
10.Henzlova MJ, Cerqueira MD, Mahmarian JJ, et al.
Stress protocols and tracers. J Nucl Cardiol . 2006;13:
e80 –e90.
11.SNM Procedure Guideline for General Imaging 6.0.
Available at: https://s3.amazonaws.com/rdcms-
snmmi/ ﬁles/production/public/docs/General_Imaging_
Version_6.0.pdf . Accessed July 26, 2021.
12.Committee on Obstetric Practice. Committee
Opinion No. 723: Guidelines for diagnostic imagingGulati et al . JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
2021 Chest Pain Guideline NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285e254

during pregnancy and lactation. Obstet Gynecol .
2017;130:e210 –e216 .
13.Ashwath M. Safety of CMR During Pregnancy and
Lactation. Available at: https://scmr.org/page/
Pregnancy . Accessed November 9, 2020.
14.ACR-SPR practice parameter for imaging pregnant
or potentially pregnant adolescents and women withionizing radiation. Available at: https://www.acr.org/-/
media/ACR/Files/Practice-Parameters/pregnant-pts.pdf. Accessed November 9, 2020.
3.3. Cardiac Testing Considerations for Women
Who Are Pregnant, Postpartum, or of Child-Bearing Age
1.Image Wisely. Available at: https://imagewisely.org .
Accessed September 10, 2020.
2.Committee on Obstetric Practice. Committee
Opinion No. 723: Guidelines for diagnostic imagingduring pregnancy and lactation. Obstet Gynecol .
2017;130:e210 –e216 .
3.Ray JG, Vermeulen MJ, Bharatha A, et al. Associa-
tion between MRI exposure during pregnancy and fetaland childhood outcomes. JAMA . 2016;316:952 –961.
4.Kodzwa R. ACR manual on contrast media: 2018
updates. Radiol Technol . 2019;91:97 –100.
5.Expert Panel on MRS, Kanal E, Barkovich AJ, et al.
ACR guidance document on MR safe practices: 2013.J Magn Reson Imaging . 2013;37:501 –530.
6.Truong QA, Rinehart S, Abbara S, et al. Coronary
computed tomographic imaging in women: an expertconsensus statement from the Society of Cardiovas-cular Computed Tomography. J Cardiovasc Comput
Tomogr . 2018;12:451 –466.
4. CHOOSING THE RIGHT PATHWAY
WITH PATIENT-CENTRICALGORITHMS FOR ACUTE CHESTPAIN
4.1. Patients With Acute Chest Pain and
Suspected ACS (Not Including STEMI)
1.Apple FS, Jesse RL, Newby LK, et al. National
academy of clinical biochemistry and IFCC committeefor standardization of markers of cardiac damagelaboratory medicine practice guidelines: analytical is-sues for biochemical markers of acute coronary syn-
dromes. Circulation . 2007;115:e352 –e355 .
2.Bandstein N, Ljung R, Johansson M, et al. Unde-
tectable high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T level in the
emergency department and risk of myocardial infarc-
tion. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;63:2569 –2578 .
3.Body R, Burrows G, Carley S, et al. High-sensitivity
cardiac troponin t concentrations below the limit of
detection to exclude acute myocardial infarction: a
prospective evaluation. Clin Chem . 2015;61:983 –989.
4.Body R, Carley S, McDowell G, et al. Rapid exclusion
of acute myocardial infarction in patients with unde-
tectable troponin using a high-sensitivity assay. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2011;58:1332 –1339 .
5.Boeddinghaus J, Nestelberger T, Twerenbold R,
et al. Direct comparison of 4 very early rule-out stra-
tegies for acute myocardial infarction using high-sensitivity cardiac troponin I. Circulation . 2017;135:
1597 –1611.
6.Chapman AR, Anand A, Boeddinghaus J, et al.
Comparison of the ef ﬁcacy and safety of early rule-out
pathways for acute myocardial infarction. Circulation .
2017;135:1586 –1596 .
7.de Lemos JA, Morrow DA, deFilippi CR. Highly sen-
sitive troponin assays and the cardiology community: a
love/hate relationship? Clin Chem . 2011;57:826 –829.
8.Jaffe AS. Chasing troponin: how low can you go if
you can see the rise? J Am Coll Cardiol . 2006;48:1763 –
1764 .
9.Jaffe AS, Apple FS, Morrow DA, et al. Being rational
about (im)precision: a statement from the Biochem-istry Subcommittee of the Joint European Society ofCardiology/American College of Cardiology Founda-
tion/American Heart Association/World Heart Federa-
tion Task Force for the De ﬁnition of Myocardial
Infarction. Clin Chem . 2010;56:941 –943.
10.Morrow DA, Cannon CP, Jesse RL, et al. National
Academy of Clinical Biochemistry laboratory medicine
practice guidelines: clinical characteristics and utiliza-tion of biochemical markers in acute coronary syn-dromes. Circulation . 2007;115:e356 –
e375 .
11.Mueller C, Giannitsis E, Christ M, et al. Multicenter
evaluation of a 0-hour/1-hour algorithm in the diag-
nosis of myocardial infarction with high-sensitivitycardiac troponin T. Ann Emerg Med . 2016;68:76 –87,
e4.
12.Odqvist M, Andersson PO, Tygesen H, et al. High-
sensitivity troponins and outcomes after myocardialinfarction. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2018;71:2616 –2624 .
13.Peacock WF, Baumann BM, Bruton D, et al. Ef ﬁcacy
of high-sensitivity troponin T in identifying very-low-
risk patients with possible acute coronary syndrome.JAMA Cardiol . 2018;3:104 –111.
14.Reichlin T, Schindler C, Drexler B, et al. One-hour
rule-out and rule-in of acute myocardial infarction
using high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T. Arch Intern
Med. 2012;172:1211 –1218 .
15.Morrow DA. Clinician ’s guide to early rule-out
strategies with high-sensitivity cardiac troponin. Cir-
culation . 2017;135:1612 –1616 .
16.Thygesen K, Alpert JS, Jaffe AS, et al. Fourth uni-
versal de ﬁnition of myocardial infarction (2018). JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2018;72:2231 –2264 .
17.Twerenbold R, Boeddinghaus J, Nestelberger T,
et al. Clinical use of high-sensitivity cardiac troponin inpatients with suspected myocardial infarction. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2017;70:996 –1012 .
18.Januzzi JL Jr, Mahler SA, Christenson RH, et al.
Recommendations for institutions transitioning tohigh-sensitivity troponin testing: JACC Scienti ﬁc
Expert Panel. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;73:1059 –1077 .
19.Huis In ’t Veld MA, Cullen L, Mahler SA, et al. The
fast and the furious: low-risk chest pain and the rapidrule-out protocol. West J Emerg Med . 2017;18:474 –
478.
20.Schulman-Marcus J, Hartaigh BO, Gransar H, et al.
Sex-speci ﬁc associations between coronary artery
plaque extent and risk of major adverse cardiovascularevents: the CONFIRM Long-Term Registry. J Am Coll
Cardiol Img . 2016;9:364
–372.
21.Hadamitzky M, Freissmuth B, Meyer T, et al.
Prognostic value of coronary computed tomographicangiography for prediction of cardiac events in pa-
tients with suspected coronary artery disease. JA m
Coll Cardiol Img . 2009;2:404 –411.
22.Finck T, Hardenberg J, Will A, et al. Ten-year
follow-up after coronary computed tomographyangiography in patients with suspected coronary ar-
tery disease. J Am Coll Cardiol Img . 2019;12:1330 –
1338 .
23.Hochman JS, Reynolds HR, Bangalore S, et al.
Baseline characteristics and risk pro ﬁles of participants
in the ISCHEMIA randomized clinical trial. JAMA Car-
diol. 2019;4:273 –286.
24.ISCHEMIA Trial Research Group, Maron DJ,
Hochman JS, et al. International Study of ComparativeHealth Effectiveness with Medical and Invasive Ap-
proaches (ISCHEMIA) trial: rationale and design. Am
Heart J . 2018;201:124 –135.
25.Pickering JW, Than MP, Cullen L, et al. Rapid rule-
out of acute myocardial infarction with a single high-
sensitivity cardiac troponin T measurement below the
limit of detection: a collaborative meta-analysis. Ann
Intern Med . 2017;166:715 –724.
26.McRae AD, Innes G, Graham M, et al. Undetectable
concentrations of a Food and Drug Administration-
approved high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T assay torule out acute myocardial infarction at emergencydepartment arrival. Acad Emerg Med . 2017;24:1267 –
1277.
27.Sandoval Y, Nowak R, deFilippi CR, et al. Myocar-
dial infarction risk strati ﬁcation with a single mea-
surement of high-sensitivity troponin I. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2019;74:271 –282.
28.Bularga A, Lee KK, Stewart S, et al. High-sensitivity
troponin and the application of risk strati ﬁcation
thresholds in patients with suspected acute coronarysyndrome. Circulation . 2019;140:1557 –1568 .
29.Chew DP, Lambrakis K, Blyth A, et al. A randomized
trial of a 1-hour troponin T protocol in suspected acutecoronary syndromes: the Rapid Assessment of PossibleAcute Coronary Syndrome in the emergency depart-ment with high-sensitivity Troponin T Study (RAPID-
TnT). Circulation . 2019;140:1543 –1556 .
30.Than M, Cullen L, Aldous S, et al. 2-Hour acceler-
ated diagnostic protocol to assess patients with chest
pain symptoms using contemporary troponins as the
only biomarker: the ADAPT trial. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2012;59:2091 –2098 .
31.Mahler SA, Riley RF, Hiestand BC, et al. The HEART
Pathway randomized trial: identifying emergencydepartment patients with acute chest pain for earlydischarge. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes . 2015;8:195 –
203.
32.Mark DG, Huang J, Chettipally U, et al. Perfor-
mance of coronary risk scores among patients withchest pain in the emergency department. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2018;71:606 –616.
33.Stopyra JP, Miller CD, Hiestand BC, et al. Chest
pain risk strati ﬁcation: a comparison of the 2-Hour
Accelerated Diagnostic Protocol (ADAPT) and theHEART pathway. Crit Pathw Cardiol . 2016;15:46 –49.
34.Stopyra JP, Miller CD, Hiestand BC, et al. Validation
of the no objective testing rule and comparison to the
HEART Pathway. Acad Emerg Med . 2017;24:1165 –1168 .
35.Stopyra JP, Riley RF, Hiestand BC, et al. The HEART
Pathway randomized controlled trial one-year out-
comes. Acad Emerg Med . 2019;26:41 –50.JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021 Gulati et al .
NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285 2021 Chest Pain Guidelinee255

36.Keller T, Zeller T, Peetz D, et al. Sensitive troponin
I assay in early diagnosis of acute myocardial infarc-tion. N Engl J Med . 2009;361:868 –877.
37.Neumann JT, Twerenbold R, Ojeda F, et al. Appli-
cation of high-sensitivity troponin in suspected
myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med . 2019;380:2529 –
2540 .
38.RofﬁM, Patrono C, Collet JP, et al. 2015 ESC
guidelines for the management of acute coronarysyndromes in patients presenting without persistentST-segment elevation: Task Force for the Managementof Acute Coronary Syndromes in Patients Presenting
Without Persistent ST-Segment Elevation of the Eu-
ropean Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J .
2016;37:267 –315.
39.Thygesen K, Mair J, Giannitsis E, et al. How to use
high-sensitivity cardiac troponins in acute cardiac care.Eur Heart J . 2012;33:2252 –2257 .
40.Cullen L, Mueller C, Parsonage WA, et al. Valida-
tion of high-sensitivity troponin I in a 2-hour diag-
nostic strategy to assess 30-day outcomes inemergency department patients with possible acutecoronary syndrome. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2013;62:1242 –
1249 .
41.Reichlin T, Twerenbold R, Wildi K, et al. Prospec-
tive validation of a 1-hour algorithm to rule-out and
rule-in acute myocardial infarction using a high-
sensitivity cardiac troponin T assay. CMAJ . 2015;187:
E243 –E252 .
42.Rubini Gimenez M, Twerenbold R, Jaeger C, et al.
One-hour rule-in and rule-out of acute myocardialinfarction using high-sensitivity cardiac troponin I. Am
J Med . 2015;128:861 –870, e4 .
43.Twerenbold R, Neumann JT, Sorensen NA, et al.
Prospective validation of the 0/1-h algorithm for earlydiagnosis of myocardial infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2018;72:620 –632.
44.Than MP, Pickering JW, Aldous SJ, et al. Effec-
tiveness of EDACS versus ADAPT accelerated diag-nostic pathways for chest pain: a pragmatic
randomized controlled trial embedded within practice.
Ann Emerg Med . 2016;68:93 –102 e1 .
45.Than M, Aldous S, Lord SJ, et al. A 2-hour diag-
nostic protocol for possible cardiac chest pain in theemergency department: a randomized clinical trial.JAMA Intern Med . 2014;174:51 –58.
46.Collet JP, Thiele H, Barbato E, et al. 2020 ESC
guidelines for the management of acute coronary
syndromes in patients presenting without persistent
ST-segment elevation. Eur Heart J . 2021;42:1289 –
1367 .
47.Twerenbold R, Costabel JP, Nestelberger T, et al.
Outcome of applying the ESC 0/1-hour algorithm inpatients with suspected myocardial infarction. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2019;74:483 –494.
48.Backus BE, Six AJ, Kelder JC, et al. A prospective
validation of the HEART score for chest pain patientsat the emergency department. Int J Cardiol . 2013;168:
2153 –2158 .
49.Fanaroff AC, Rymer JA, Goldstein SA, et al. Does
this patient with chest pain have acute coronary syn-drome?: the rational clinical examination systematic
review. JAMA . 2015;314:1955 –1965 .
50.McCord J, Cabrera R, Lindahl B, et al. Prognostic
utility of a modi ﬁed HEART score in chest pain patientsin the emergency department. Circ Cardiovasc Qual
Outcomes . 2017;10:e003101 .
51.Bank IEM, de Hoog VC, de Kleijn DPV, et al. Sex-
based differences in the performance of the HEARTscore in patients presenting to the emergencydepartment with acute chest pain. J Am Heart Assoc .
2017;6:e005373 .
52.Romero-Farina G, Candell-Riera J, Aguade-Bruix S,
et al. Warranty periods for normal myocardial perfu-sion stress SPECT. J Nucl Cardiol . 2015;22:44 –54.
53.Twerenbold R, Wildi K, Jaeger C, et al. Optimal
cutoff levels of more sensitive cardiac troponin assaysfor the early diagnosis of myocardial infarction in pa-tients with renal dysfunction. Circulation . 2015;131:
2041 –2050 .
54.Wildi K, Nelles B, Twerenbold R, et al. Safety and
efﬁcacy of the 0 h/3 h protocol for rapid rule out of
myocardial infarction. Am Heart J . 2016;181:16 –25.
55.Zhelev Z, Hyde C, Youngman E, et al. Diagnostic
accuracy of single baseline measurement of ElecsysTroponin T high-sensitive assay for diagnosis of acutemyocardial infarction in emergency department: sys-tematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ. 2015;350:h15 .
4.1.1. Low Risk Patients With Acute Chest Pain
1.Bandstein N, Ljung R, Johansson M, et al. Unde-
tectable high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T level in theemergency department and risk of myocardial infarc-tion. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;63:2569 –2578 .
2.Chapman AR, Anand A, Boeddinghaus J, et al.
Comparison of the ef ﬁcacy and safety of early rule-out
pathways for acute myocardial infarction. Circulation .
2017;135:1586 –1596 .
3.Mueller C, Giannitsis E, Christ M, et al. Multicenter
evaluation of a 0-hour/1-hour algorithm in the diag-
nosis of myocardial infarction with high-sensitivitycardiac troponin T. Ann Emerg Med . 2016;68:76 –87,
e4.
4.Reichlin T, Schindler C, Drexler B, et al. One-hour
rule-out and rule-in of acute myocardial infarctionusing high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T. Arch Intern
Med. 2012;172:1211 –1218 .
5.Reichlin T, Twerenbold R, Wildi K, et al. Prospective
validation of a 1-hour algorithm to rule-out and rule-in
acute myocardial infarction using a high-sensitivitycardiac troponin T assay. CMAJ . 2015;187:E243 –E252 .
6.Rubini Gimenez M, Hoeller R, Reichlin T, et al. Rapid
rule out of acute myocardial infarction using unde-tectable levels of high-sensitivity cardiac troponin. Int
J Cardiol . 2013;168:3896 –3901 .
7.Rubini Gimenez M, Twerenbold R, Jaeger C, et al.
One-hour rule-in and rule-out of acute myocardial
infarction using high-sensitivity cardiac troponin I. Am
J Med . 2015;128:861 –870, e4 .
8.Twerenbold R, Neumann JT, Sorensen NA, et al.
Prospective validation of the 0/1-h algorithm for earlydiagnosis of myocardial infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2018;72:620 –632.
9.Pickering JW, Than MP, Cullen L, et al. Rapid rule-
out of acute myocardial infarction with a single high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T measurement below the
limit of detection: a collaborative meta-analysis. Ann
Intern Med . 2017;166:715 –724.
10.Peacock WF, Baumann BM, Bruton D, et al. Ef ﬁcacy
of high-sensitivity troponin T in identifying very-low-risk patients with possible acute coronary syndrome.
JAMA Cardiol . 2018;3:104 –111.
11.Neumann JT, Twerenbold R, Ojeda F, et al. Appli-
cation of high-sensitivity troponin in suspectedmyocardial infarction. N Engl J Med . 2019;380:2529 –
2540 .
12.Greenslade JH, Carlton EW, Van Hise C, et al.
Diagnostic accuracy of a new high-sensitivity troponinI assay and ﬁve accelerated diagnostic pathways for
ruling out acute myocardial infarction and acute cor-onary syndrome. Ann Emerg Med . 2018;71:439 –451,
e3.
13.Cullen L, Mueller C, Parsonage WA, et al. Validation
of high-sensitivity troponin I in a 2-hour diagnostic
strategy to assess 30-day outcomes in emergency
department patients with possible acute coronarysyndrome. J Am Coll Cardiol
. 2013;62:1242 –1249 .
14.Flaws D, Than M, Scheuermeyer FX, et al.
External validation of the emergency departmentassessment of chest pain score accelerated diag-nostic pathway (EDACS-ADP). Emerg Med J . 2016;33:
618–625.
15.Stopyra JP, Miller CD, Hiestand BC, et al. Validation
of the no objective testing rule and comparison to theHEART Pathway. Acad Emerg Med . 2017;24:1165 –1168 .
16.Than M, Aldous S, Lord SJ, et al. A 2-hour diag-
nostic protocol for possible cardiac chest pain in theemergency department: a randomized clinical trial.JAMA Intern Med . 2014;174:51 –58.
17.Twerenbold R, Boeddinghaus J, Nestelberger T,
et al. Clinical use of high-sensitivity cardiac troponin in
patients with suspected myocardial infarction. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2017;70:996 –1012 .
18.Mahler SA, Lenoir KM, Wells BJ, et al. Safely
identifying emergency department patients with acutechest pain for early discharge. Circulation . 2018;138:
2456 –2468 .
19.Amsterdam EA, Wenger NK, Brindis RG, et al. 2014
AHA/ACC guideline for the management of patients
with non-ST-elevation acute coronary syndromes: a
report of the American College of Cardiology/Amer-ican Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guide-lines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;64:e139 –e228 .
20.Mahler SA, Riley RF, Hiestand BC, et al. The HEART
Pathway randomized trial: identifying emergencydepartment patients with acute chest pain for earlydischarge. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes . 2015;8:195 –
203.
21.Than M, Cullen L, Aldous S, et al. 2-Hour acceler-
ated diagnostic protocol to assess patients with chestpain symptoms using contemporary troponins as theonly biomarker: the ADAPT trial. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2012;59:2091 –2098 .
4.1.1.1. Cost-Value Considerations in the Evaluation
of Low-Risk Patients
1.Velickovic VM, Rochau U, Conrads-Frank A, et al.
Systematic assessment of decision-analytic modelsevaluating diagnostic tests for acute myocardialinfarction based on cardiac troponin assays. Expert Rev
Pharmacoecon Outcomes Res . 2018:1 –22.
2.Westwood M, van Asselt T, Ramaekers B, et al.
High-sensitivity troponin assays for the early rule-out
or diagnosis of acute myocardial infarction in peoplewith acute chest pain: a systematic review and cost-Gulati et al . JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
2021 Chest Pain Guideline NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285e256

effectiveness analysis. Health Technol Assess . 2015;19:
1–234.
3.Goodacre S, Thokala P, Carroll C, et al. Systematic
review, meta-analysis and economic modelling ofdiagnostic strategies for suspected acute coronarysyndrome. Health Technol Assess . 2013;17:v –vi, 1-188 .
4.Polanczyk CA, Kuntz KM, Sacks DB, et al. Emer-
gency department triage strategies for acute chestpain using creatine kinase-MB and troponin I assays: a
cost-effectiveness analysis. Ann Intern Med . 1999;131:
909 –918.
5.Poldervaart JM, Reitsma JB, Backus BE, et al. Effect
of using the HEART score in patients with chest pain inthe emergency department: a stepped-wedge, clusterrandomized trial. Ann Intern Med . 2017;166:689 –697.
6.Riley RF, Miller CD, Russell GB, et al. Cost analysis
of the History, ECG, Age, Risk factors, and initialTroponin (HEART) Pathway randomized control trial.Am J Emerg Med . 2017;35:77 –81.
7.Parsonage WA, Milburn T, Ashover S, et al. Imple-
menting change: evaluating the Accelerated Chestpain Risk Evaluation (ACRE) project. Med J Aust .
2017;207:201 –205.
8.Julicher P, Greenslade JH, Parsonage WA, et al. The
organisational value of diagnostic strategies using
high-sensitivity troponin for patients with possible
acute coronary syndromes: a trial-based cost-effec-tiveness analysis. BMJ Open . 2017;7:e013653 .
9.Cheng Q, Greenslade JH, Parsonage WA, et al.
Change to costs and lengths of stay in the emergencydepartment and the Brisbane protocol: an observa-tional study. BMJ Open . 2016;6:e009746 .
10.Roberts RR, Zalenski RJ, Mensah EK, et al. Costs of
an emergency department-based accelerated diag-nostic protocol vs hospitalization in patients withchest pain: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA .
1997;278:1670 –1676 .
11.Kip MMA, Kof ﬁjberg H, Moesker MJ, et al. The cost-
utility of point-of-care troponin testing to diagnose
acute coronary syndrome in primary care. BMC Car-
diovasc Disord . 2017;17:213 .
12.Vaidya A, Severens JL, Bongaerts BW, et al. High-
sensitive troponin T assay for the diagnosis of acutemyocardial infarction: an economic evaluation. BMC
Cardiovasc Disord . 2014;14:77 .
13.Twerenbold R, Jaeger C, Rubini Gimenez M, et al.
Impact of high-sensitivity cardiac troponin on use ofcoronary angiography, cardiac stress testing, and timeto discharge in suspected acute myocardial infarction.Eur Heart J . 2016;37:3324 –3332 .
4.1.2. Intermediate-Risk Patients With Acute
Chest Pain
1.Farkouh ME, Smars PA, Reeder GS, et al. A clinical
trial of a chest-pain observation unit for patients with
unstable angina. Chest Pain Evaluation in the Emer-gency Room (CHEER) Investigators. N Engl J Med .
1998;339:1882 –1888 .
2.Miller CD, Hwang W, Hoekstra JW, et al. Stress
cardiac magnetic resonance imaging with observationunit care reduces cost for patients with emergent
chest pain: a randomized trial. Ann Emerg Med .
2010;201056:209 –219.
3.Roberts RR, Zalenski RJ, Mensah EK, et al. Costs of
an emergency department-based accelerated diag-nostic protocol vs hospitalization in patients withchest pain: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA .
1997;278:1670 –1676 .
4.Ross MA, Hockenberry JM, Mutter R, et al. Proto-
col-driven emergency department observation unitsoffer savings, shorter stays, and reduced admissions.Health Aff (Millwood) . 2013;32:2149 –2156 .
5.Rydman RJ, Zalenski RJ, Roberts RR, et al. Patient
satisfaction with an emergency department chest painobservation unit. Ann Emerg Med . 1997;29:109 –115.
6.Miller CD, Hwang W, Case D, et al. Stress CMR im-
aging observation unit in the emergency departmentreduces 1-year medical care costs in patients withacute chest pain: a randomized study for comparison
with inpatient care. J Am Coll Cardiol Img . 2011;4:862 –
870.
7.Hockenberry JM, Mutter R, Barrett M, et al. Factors
associated with prolonged observation services stays
and the impact of long stays on patient cost. Health
Serv Res . 2014;49:893 –909.
8.Labovitz AJ, Noble VE, Bierig M, et al. Focused
cardiac ultrasound in the emergent setting: aconsensus statement of the American Society ofEchocardiography and American College of EmergencyPhysicians. J Am Soc Echocardiogr . 2010;23:1225 –1230 .
9.RofﬁM, Patrono C, Collet JP, et al. 2015 ESC
guidelines for the management of acute coronarysyndromes in patients presenting without persistentST-segment elevation: Task Force for the Managementof Acute Coronary Syndromes in Patients Presenting
Without Persistent ST-Segment Elevation of the Eu-
ropean Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J .
2016;37:267 –315.
10.Amsterdam EA, Wenger NK, Brindis RG, et al. 2014
AHA/ACC guideline for the management of patientswith non-ST-elevation acute coronary syndromes: areport of the American College of Cardiology/Amer-ican Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guide-lines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;64:e139 –e228 .
11.Douglas PS, Garcia MJ, Haines D, et al. ACCF/ASE/
AHA/ASNC/HFSA/HRS/SCAI/SCCM/SCCT/SCMR 2011appropriate use criteria for echocardiography: a report
of the American College of Cardiology Foundation
Appropriate Use Criteria Task Force, American Societyof Echocardiography, American Heart Association,American Society of Nuclear Cardiology, Heart FailureSociety of America, Heart Rhythm Society, Society forCardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, Societyof Critical Care Medicine, Society of Cardiovascular
Computed Tomography, and Society for Cardiovascu-
lar Magnetic Resonance. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2011;57:
1126 –
1166 .
12.Sicari R, Nihoyannopoulos P, Evangelista A, et al.
Stress echocardiography expert consensus statement —
executive summary: European Association of Echo-cardiography (EAE) (a registered branch of the ESC).Eur Heart J . 2009;30:278 –289.
13.Health Quality O. Stress echocardiography for the
diagnosis of coronary artery disease: an evidence-based analysis. Ont Health Technol Assess Ser .
2010;10:1 –61.
4.1.2.1. Intermediate-Risk Patients With Acute
Chest Pain and No Known CAD
1.Goldstein JA, Chinnaiyan KM, Abidov A, et al. The
CT-STAT (Coronary Computed Tomographic Angiog-raphy for Systematic Triage of Acute Chest PainPatients to Treatment) trial. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2011;58:
1414 –1422 .
2.Litt HI, Gatsonis C, Snyder B, et al. CT angiography
for safe discharge of patients with possible acutecoronary syndromes. N Engl J Med . 2012;366:1393 –
1403 .
3.Goodacre S, Thokala P, Carroll C, et al. Systematic
review, meta-analysis and economic modelling of
diagnostic strategies for suspected acute coronary
syndrome. Health Technol Assess . 2013;17:v –vi, 1 –188.
4.Goldstein JA, Gallagher MJ, O ’Neill WW, et al.
A randomized controlled trial of multi-slice coronarycomputed tomography for evaluation of acute chestpain. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2007;49:863 –871.
5.Chang SA, Choi SI, Choi EK, et al. Usefulness of 64-
slice multidetector computed tomography as an initialdiagnostic approach in patients with acute chest pain.Am Heart J . 2008;156:375 –383.
6.Miller AH, Pepe PE, Peshock R, et al. Is coronary
computed tomography angiography a resource sparingstrategy in the risk strati ﬁcation and evaluation of
acute chest pain? Results of a randomized controlled
trial. Acad Emerg Med . 2011;18:458 –467.
7.Hoffmann U, Truong QA, Schoenfeld DA, et al.
Coronary CT angiography versus standard evaluation inacute chest pain. N Engl J Med . 2012;367:299 –308.
8.Linde JJ, Kofoed KF, Sorgaard M, et al. Cardiac
computed tomography guided treatment strategy inpatients with recent acute-onset chest pain: resultsfrom the randomised, controlled trial: CArdiac cT in thetreatment of acute CHest pain (CATCH). Int J Cardiol .
2013;168:5257 –5262 .
9.Hamilton-Craig C, Fifoot A, Hansen M, et al. Diag-
nostic performance and cost of CT angiography versus
stress ECG —a randomized prospective study of sus-
pected acute coronary syndrome chest pain in theemergency department (CT-COMPARE). Int J Cardiol .
2014;177:867 –873.
10.Levsky JM, Spevack DM, Travin MI, et al. Coronary
computed tomography angiography versus radionu-clide myocardial perfusion imaging in patients withchest pain admitted to telemetry: a randomized trial.
Ann Intern Med . 2015;163:174 –183.
11.Dedic A, Lubbers MM, Schaap J, et al. Coronary CT
angiography for suspected ACS in the era of high-
sensitivity troponins: randomized multicenter study.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2016;67:16 –26.
12.Hoffmann U, Ferencik M, Udelson JE, et al. Prog-
nostic value of noninvasive cardiovascular testing inpatients with stable chest pain: insights from thePROMISE trial (Prospective Multicenter Imaging Studyfor Evaluation of Chest Pain). Circulation . 2017;135:
2320 –2332 .
13.Min JK, Dunning A, Lin FY, et al. Age- and sex-
related differences in all-cause mortality risk based
on coronary computed tomography angiography ﬁnd-
ings results from the International MulticenterCONFIRM (Coronary CT Angiography Evaluation forClinical Outcomes: An International Multicenter Reg-istry) of 23,854 patients without known coronary ar-tery disease. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2011;58:849 –860.
14.Blankstein R, Ahmed W, Bamberg F, et al. Com-
parison of exercise treadmill testing with cardiac
computed tomography angiography among patients
presenting to the emergency room with chest pain: theRule Out Myocardial Infarction Using Computer-JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021 Gulati et al .
NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285 2021 Chest Pain Guidelinee257

Assisted Tomography (ROMICAT) study. Circ Car-
diovasc Imaging . 2012;5:233 –242.
15.Jeetley P, Burden L, Stoykova B, et al. Clinical and
economic impact of stress echocardiography comparedwith exercise electrocardiography in patients withsuspected acute coronary syndrome but negativetroponin: a prospective randomized controlled study.
Eur Heart J . 2007;28:204 –211.
16.Dadkhah S, Almuwaqqat Z, Sulaiman S, et al.
Sensitive troponin I and stress testing in the emer-
gency department for the early management of chestpain using 2-hour protocol. Crit Pathw Cardiol .
2017;16:89 –92.
17.Nucifora G, Badano LP, Sarraf-Zadegan N, et al.
Comparison of early dobutamine stress echocardiog-raphy and exercise electrocardiographic testing formanagement of patients presenting to the emergencydepartment with chest pain. Am J Cardiol . 2007;100:
1068 –1073 .
18.Jasani G, Papas M, Patel AJ, et al. Immediate stress
echocardiography for low-risk chest pain patients in
the emergency department: a prospective observa-tional cohort study. J Emerg Med . 2018;54:156 –164.
19.Krishnan S, Venn R, Blumenthal DM, et al. Utili-
zation of stress testing for low-risk patients with chestdiscomfort in the emergency department. J Nucl Car-
diol. 2019;26:1642 –1646 .
20.Hermann LK, Newman DH, Pleasant WA, et al.
Yield of routine provocative cardiac testing amongpatients in an emergency department-based chest painunit. JAMA Intern Med . 2013;173:1128 –1133.
21.Diercks DB, Mumma BE, Frank Peacock W, et al.
Incremental value of objective cardiac testing inaddition to physician impression and serial contem-
porary troponin measurements in women. Acad Emerg
Med. 2013;20:265 –270.
22.Poldervaart JM, Six AJ, Backus BE, et al. The pre-
dictive value of the exercise ECG for major adversecardiac events in patients who presented with chestpain in the emergency department. Clin Res Cardiol .
2013;102:305 –312.
23.Napoli AM, Tran S, Wang J. Low-risk chest pain
patients younger than 40 years do not bene ﬁt from
admission and stress testing. Crit Pathw Cardiol .
2013;12:201 –203.
24.Scott AC, Bilesky J, Lamanna A, et al. Limited
utility of exercise stress testing in the evaluation of
suspected acute coronary syndrome in patients aged
less than 40 years with intermediate risk features.Emerg Med Australas . 2014;26:170 –176.
25.
Aldous S, Richards AM, Cullen L, et al. The incre-
mental value of stress testing in patients with acutechest pain beyond serial cardiac troponin testing.Emerg Med J . 2016;33:319 –324.
26.Greenslade JH, Parsonage W, Ho A, et al. Utility of
routine exercise stress testing among intermediate riskchest pain patients attending an emergency depart-ment. Heart Lung Circ . 2015;24:879 –884.
27.Skoien W. Diagnostic Yield of Routine Stress
Testing in low and intermediate risk chest pain patientsunder 40 years: a systematic review. Crit Pathw Car-
diol. 2016;15:114 –120.
28.Amsterdam EA, Wenger NK, Brindis RG, et al. 2014
AHA/ACC guideline for the management of patients
with non-ST-elevation acute coronary syndromes: areport of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice
Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;64:e139 –e228 .
29.Levsky JM, Haramati LB, Spevack DM, et al. Cor-
onary computed tomography angiography versusstress echocardiography in acute chest pain: a ran-domized controlled trial. J Am Coll Cardiol Img .
2018;11:1288 –1297 .
30.Heitner JF, Klem I, Rasheed D, et al. Stress cardiac
MR imaging compared with stress echocardiography in
the early evaluation of patients who present to theemergency department with intermediate-risk chestpain. Radiology . 2014;271:56 –64.
31.Udelson JE, Beshansky JR, Ballin DS, et al.
Myocardial perfusion imaging for evaluation and triageof patients with suspected acute cardiac ischemia: arandomized controlled trial. JAMA . 2002;288:2693 –
2700 .
32.Miller CD, Case LD, Little WC, et al. Stress CMR
reduces revascularization, hospital readmission, and
recurrent cardiac testing in intermediate-risk patients
with acute chest pain. J Am Coll Cardiol Img . 2013;6:
785–794.
33.Miller CD, Hwang W, Case D, et al. Stress CMR
imaging observation unit in the emergency depart-ment reduces 1-year medical care costs in patientswith acute chest pain: a randomized study for com-parison with inpatient care. J Am Coll Cardiol Img .
2011;4:862 –870.
34.Miller CD, Hwang W, Hoekstra JW, et al. Stress
cardiac magnetic resonance imaging with observation
unit care reduces cost for patients with emergent
chest pain: a randomized trial. Ann Emerg Med .
2010;201056:209 –219.
35.Ingkanisorn WP, Kwong RY, Bohme NS, et al.
Prognosis of negative adenosine stress magneticresonance in patients presenting to an emergencydepartment with chest pain. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2006;47:1427 –1432 .
36.
Siontis GC, Mavridis D, Greenwood JP, et al. Out-
comes of non-invasive diagnostic modalities for the
detection of coronary artery disease: network meta-
analysis of diagnostic randomised controlled trials.BMJ. 2018;360:k504 .
37.Norgaard BL, Leipsic J, Gaur S, et al. Diagnostic
performance of noninvasive fractional ﬂow reserve
derived from coronary computed tomography angiog-raphy in suspected coronary artery disease: the NXT trial(Analysis of Coronary Blood Flow Using CT Angiography:Next Steps). J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;63:1145 –1155.
38.Sand NPR, Veien KT, Nielsen SS, et al. Prospective
comparison of FFR derived from coronary ct angiog-
raphy with SPECT perfusion imaging in stable coronary
artery disease: the ReASSESS study. J Am Coll Cardiol
Img. 2018;11:1640 –1650 .
39.Patel MR, Norgaard BL, Fairbairn TA, et al. 1-Year
impact on medical practice and clinical outcomes ofFFRCT: the ADVANCE registry. J Am Coll Cardiol Img .
2020;13:97 –105.
40.Fairbairn TA, Nieman K, Akasaka T, et al. Real-
world clinical utility and impact on clinical decision-making of coronary computed tomography
angiography-derived fractional ﬂow reserve: lessons
from the ADVANCE Registry. Eur Heart J . 2018;39:
3701 –3711.
41.Nakanishi R, Osawa K, Ceponiene I, et al. The
diagnostic performance of SPECT-MPI to predictfunctional signi ﬁcant coronary artery disease by frac-
tional ﬂow reserve derived from CCTA (FFRCT): sub-
analysis from ACCURACY and VCT001 studies. Int J
Cardiovasc Imaging . 2017;33:2067 –2072 .
42.Chinnaiyan KM, Sa ﬁan RD, Gallagher ML, et al.
Clinical use of CT-derived fractional ﬂow reserve in the
emergency department. J Am Coll Cardiol Img .
2020;13:452 –461.
43.Ferencik M, Lu MT, Mayrhofer T, et al. Non-inva-
sive fractional ﬂow reserve derived from coronary
computed tomography angiography in patients with
acute chest pain: subgroup analysis of the ROMICAT IItrial. J Cardiovasc Comput Tomogr . 2019;13:196 –202.
44.Schulman-Marcus J, Hartaigh BO, Gransar H, et al.
Sex-speci ﬁc associations between coronary artery
plaque extent and risk of major adverse cardiovascularevents: the CONFIRM long-term registry. J Am Coll
Cardiol Img . 2016;9:364
–372.
45.Hadamitzky M, Freissmuth B, Meyer T, et al.
Prognostic value of coronary computed tomographicangiography for prediction of cardiac events in pa-tients with suspected coronary artery disease. JA m
Coll Cardiol Img . 2009;2:404 –411.
46.Finck T, Hardenberg J, Will A, et al. Ten-year
follow-up after coronary computed tomography
angiography in patients with suspected coronary ar-
tery disease. J Am Coll Cardiol Img . 2019;12:1330 –
1338 .
47.Hulten E, Pickett C, Bittencourt MS, et al. Out-
comes after coronary computed tomography angiog-raphy in the emergency department: a systematicreview and meta-analysis of randomized, controlledtrials. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2013;61:880 –892.
48.Linde JJ, Hove JD, Sorgaard M, et al. Long-term
clinical impact of coronary CT angiography in patientswith recent acute-onset chest pain: the randomizedcontrolled CATCH trial. J Am Coll Cardiol Img . 2015;8:
1404 –1413.
49.Hulten E, Pickett C, Bittencourt MS, et al. Meta-
analysis of coronary CT angiography in the emergency
department. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging . 2013;14:
607.
50.D’Ascenzo F, Cerrato E, Biondi-Zoccai G, et al.
Coronary computed tomographic angiography fordetection of coronary artery disease in patients pre-senting to the emergency department with chest pain:a meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. Eur Heart
J Cardiovasc Imaging . 2013;14:782 –789.
51.Hachamovitch R, Nutter B, Hlatky MA, et al. Patient
management after noninvasive cardiac imaging resultsfrom SPARC (Study of myocardial perfusion and cor-
onary anatomy imaging roles in coronary artery dis-
ease). J Am Coll Cardiol . 2012;59:462 –474.
52.Shaw LJ, Berman DS, Picard MH, et al. Comparative
deﬁnitions for moderate-severe ischemia in stress nu-
clear, echocardiography, and magnetic resonance im-aging. J Am Coll Cardiol Img . 2014;7:593 –604.
53.Fihn SD, Gardin JM, Abrams J, et al. 2012 ACCF/
AHA/ACP/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS guideline for thediagnosis and management of patients with stableischemic heart disease: a report of the American Col-lege of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Asso-ciation Task Force on Practice Guidelines, and the
American College of Physicians, American Association
for Thoracic Surgery, Preventive Cardiovascular NursesAssociation, Society for Cardiovascular AngiographyGulati et al . JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
2021 Chest Pain Guideline NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285e258

and Interventions, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons.
J Am Coll Cardiol . 2012;60:e44 –164.
54.RofﬁM, Patrono C, Collet JP, et al. 2015 ESC
Guidelines for the management of acute coronarysyndromes in patients presenting without persistentST-segment elevation: Task Force for the Management
of Acute Coronary Syndromes in Patients Presenting
without Persistent ST-Segment Elevation of the Eu-ropean Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J .
2016;37:267 –315.
55.Khan A, Engineer R, Wang S, et al. Initial experi-
ence regarding the safety and yield of rest-stressmyocardial perfusion imaging in emergency depart-ment patients with mildly abnormal high-sensitivity
cardiac troponins. J Nucl Cardiol . 2020. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s12350-020-02145-w .
4.1.2.1.1. Cost-Value Considerations
1.Jasani G, Papas M, Patel AJ, et al. Immediate stress
echocardiography for low-risk chest pain patients inthe emergency department: a prospective observa-tional cohort study. J Emerg Med . 2018;54:156 –164.
2.Davies R, Liu G, Sciamanna C, et al. Comparison of
the effectiveness of stress echocardiography versus
myocardial perfusion imaging in patients presenting to
the emergency department with low-risk chest pain.Am J Cardiol . 2016;118:1786 –1791.
3.Levsky JM, Haramati LB, Spevack DM, et al. Coro-
nary computed tomography angiography versus stressechocardiography in acute chest pain: a randomizedcontrolled trial. J Am Coll Cardiol Img . 2018;11:1288 –
1297 .
4.Goldstein JA, Chinnaiyan KM, Abidov A, et al. The
CT-STAT (Coronary Computed Tomographic Angiog-
raphy for Systematic Triage of Acute Chest Pain Pa-tients to Treatment) trial. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2011;58:
1414 –1422 .
5.Litt HI, Gatsonis C, Snyder B, et al. CT angiography
for safe discharge of patients with possible acute cor-onary syndromes. N Engl J Med . 2012;366:1393 –1403 .
6.Hoffmann U, Truong QA, Schoenfeld DA, et al.
Coronary CT angiography versus standard evaluation inacute chest pain. N Engl J Med . 2012;367:299 –308.
7.Hulten E, Pickett C, Bittencourt MS, et al. Outcomes
after coronary computed tomography angiography in
the emergency department: a systematic review and
meta-analysis of randomized, controlled trials. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2013;61:880 –892.
8.D’Ascenzo F, Cerrato E, Biondi-Zoccai G, et al.
Coronary computed tomographic angiography fordetection of coronary artery disease in patients pre-senting to the emergency department with chest pain:a meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. Eur Heart
J Cardiovasc Imaging . 2013;14:782 –789
.
4.1.2.2. Intermediate-Risk Patients With Acute
C h e s tP a i na n dK n o w nC A D
1.Boden WE, O ’Rourke RA, Teo KK, et al. Optimal
medical therapy with or without PCI for stable coro-nary disease. N Engl J Med . 2007;356:1503 –1516 .
2.Maron DJ, Hochman JS, Reynolds HR, et al. Initial
invasive or conservative strategy for stable coronary
disease. N Engl J Med . 2020;382:1395 –1407 .
3.Hoffmann U, Truong QA, Schoenfeld DA, et al.
Coronary CT angiography versus standard evaluation in
acute chest pain. N Engl J Med . 2012;367:299 –308.4.Goldstein JA, Chinnaiyan KM, Abidov A, et al. The
CT-STAT (Coronary Computed Tomographic Angiog-raphy for Systematic Triage of Acute Chest Pain Pa-tients to Treatment) trial. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2011;58:
1414 –1422 .
5.Litt HI, Gatsonis C, Snyder B, et al. CT angiography
for safe discharge of patients with possible acutecoronary syndromes. N Engl J Med . 2012;366:1393 –
1403 .
6.Hulten E, Pickett C, Bittencourt MS, et al. Outcomes
after coronary computed tomography angiography inthe emergency department: a systematic review and
meta-analysis of randomized, controlled trials. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2013;61:880 –892.
7.Goodacre S, Thokala P, Carroll C, et al. Systematic
review, meta-analysis and economic modelling ofdiagnostic strategies for suspected acute coronarysyndrome. Health Technol Assess . 2013;17:v –vi, 1 –188.
8.Hulten E, Pickett C, Bittencourt MS, et al. Meta-
analysis of coronary CT angiography in the emergency
department. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging . 2013;14:
607.
9.Puchner SB, Liu T, Mayrhofer T, et al. High-risk
plaque detected on coronary CT angiography predictsacute coronary syndromes independent of signi ﬁcant
stenosis in acute chest pain: results from theROMICAT-II trial. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;64:684 –692.
10.Motoyama S, Ito H, Sarai M, et al. Plaque charac-
terization by coronary computed tomography angiog-raphy and the likelihood of acute coronary events inmid-term follow-up. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2015;66:337 –
346.
11.Chang HJ, Lin FY, Lee SE, et al. Coronary athero-
sclerotic precursors of acute coronary syndromes. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2018;71:2511
–2522 .
12.Douglas PS, Pontone G, Hlatky MA, et al. Clinical
outcomes of fractional ﬂow reserve by computed
tomographic angiography-guided diagnostic strategiesvs. usual care in patients with suspected coronary ar-tery disease: the prospective longitudinal trial ofFFR(CT): outcome and resource impacts study. Eur
Heart J . 2015;36:3359 –3367 .
13.Norgaard BL, Leipsic J, Gaur S, et al. Diagnostic
performance of noninvasive fractional ﬂow reserve
derived from coronary computed tomography angi-ography in suspected coronary artery disease: the NXTtrial (Analysis of Coronary Blood Flow Using CT Angi-ography: Next Steps). J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;63:1145 –
1155.
14.Patel MR, Norgaard BL, Fairbairn TA, et al. 1-Year
impact on medical practice and clinical outcomes ofFFRCT: the ADVANCE registry. J Am Coll Cardiol Img .
2020;13:97 –105.
15.Fairbairn TA, Nieman K, Akasaka T, et al. Real-
world clinical utility and impact on clinical decision-making of coronary computed tomography
angiography-derived fractional ﬂow reserve: lessons
from the ADVANCE Registry. Eur Heart J . 2018;39:
3701 –3711.
16.Chinnaiyan KM, Sa ﬁan RD, Gallagher ML, et al.
Clinical use of CT-derived fractional ﬂow reserve in the
emergency department. J Am Coll Cardiol Img .
2020;13:452 –461.
17.Ferencik M, Lu MT, Mayrhofer T, et al. Non-invasive
fractional ﬂow reserve derived from coronary
computed tomography angiography in patients withacute chest pain: subgroup analysis of the ROMICAT II
trial. J Cardiovasc Comput Tomogr . 2019;13:196 –202.
18.Udelson JE, Beshansky JR, Ballin DS, et al.
Myocardial perfusion imaging for evaluation and triageof patients with suspected acute cardiac ischemia: arandomized controlled trial. JAMA . 2002;288:2693 –
2700 .
19.Nucifora G, Badano LP, Sarraf-Zadegan N, et al.
Comparison of early dobutamine stress echocardiog-raphy and exercise electrocardiographic testing formanagement of patients presenting to the emergencydepartment with chest pain. Am J Cardiol . 2007;100:
1068 –1073 .
20.Linde JJ, Kofoed KF, Sorgaard M, et al. Cardiac
computed tomography guided treatment strategy inpatients with recent acute-onset chest pain: results
from the randomised, controlled trial: CArdiac cT in the
treatment of acute CHest pain (CATCH). Int J Cardiol .
2013;168:5257 –
5262 .
21.Blankstein R, Ahmed W, Bamberg F, et al. Com-
parison of exercise treadmill testing with cardiaccomputed tomography angiography among patientspresenting to the emergency room with chest pain: theRule Out Myocardial Infarction Using Computer-
Assisted Tomography (ROMICAT) study. Circ Car-
diovasc Imaging . 2012;5:233 –242.
22.Shaw LJ, Berman DS, Maron DJ, et al. Optimal
medical therapy with or without percutaneous coro-nary intervention to reduce ischemic burden: resultsfrom the Clinical Outcomes Utilizing Revascularizationand Aggressive Drug Evaluation (COURAGE) trial nu-clear substudy. Circulation . 2008;117:1283 –1291 .
23.Boden WE, O ’Rourke RA, Crawford MH, et al.
Outcomes in patients with acute non-Q-wave
myocardial infarction randomly assigned to an inva-sive as compared with a conservative managementstrategy. Veterans Affairs Non-Q-Wave InfarctionStrategies in Hospital (VANQWISH) Trial Investigators.N Engl J Med . 1998;338:1785 –1792 .
24.Lee SE, Chang HJ, Sung JM, et al. Effects of
statins on coronary atherosclerotic plaques: the
PARADIGM study. J Am Coll Cardiol Img . 2018;11:
1475 –1484 .
25.Sand NPR, Veien KT, Nielsen SS, et al. Prospective
comparison of FFR derived from coronary ct angiog-raphy with SPECT perfusion imaging in stable coronaryartery disease: the ReASSESS study. J Am Coll Cardiol
Img. 2018;11:1640 –1650 .
26.Fihn SD, Gardin JM, Abrams J, et al. 2012 ACCF/
AHA/ACP/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS guideline for thediagnosis and management of patients with stable
ischemic heart disease: a report of the American Col-
lege of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Asso-ciation Task Force on Practice Guidelines, and theAmerican College of Physicians, American Associationfor Thoracic Surgery, Preventive Cardiovascular NursesAssociation, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography
and Interventions, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons.
J Am Coll Cardiol . 2012;60:e44 –164.
4.1.3. High-Risk Patients With Acute Chest Pain
1.Mahmarian JJ, Shaw LJ, Filipchuk NG, et al.
A multinational study to establish the value of earlyadenosine technetium-99m sestamibi myocardialperfusion imaging in identifying a low-risk group forearly hospital discharge after acute myocardial
infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2006;48:2448 –2457 .JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021 Gulati et al .
NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285 2021 Chest Pain Guidelinee259

2.Mahmarian JJ, Dakik HA, Filipchuk NG, et al. An
initial strategy of intensive medical therapy is com-parable to that of coronary revascularization for sup-pression of scintigraphic ischemia in high-risk but
stable survivors of acute myocardial infarction. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2006;48:2458 –2467 .
3.Yan AT, Yan RT, Tan M, et al. Risk scores for risk
strati ﬁcation in acute coronary syndromes: useful but
simpler is not necessarily better. Eur Heart J . 2007;28:
1072 –1078 .
4.Amsterdam EA, Wenger NK, Brindis RG, et al. 2014
AHA/ACC guideline for the management of patients
with non-ST-elevation acute coronary syndromes: areport of the American College of Cardiology/Amer-ican Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guide-lines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;64:e139 –e228 .
5.Patel MR, Calhoon JH, Dehmer GJ, et al. ACC/AATS/
AHA/ASE/ASNC/SCAI/SCCT/STS 2017 appropriate use
criteria for coronary revascularization in patients with
stable ischemic heart disease: a report of the AmericanCollege of Cardiology Appropriate Use Criteria TaskForce, American Association for Thoracic Surgery,American Heart Association, American Society ofEchocardiography, American Society of Nuclear Car-diology, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and
Interventions, Society of Cardiovascular Computed
Tomography, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2017;69:2212 –2241 .
6.Patel MR, Bailey SR, Bonow RO, et al. ACCF/SCAI/
AATS/AHA/ASE/ASNC/HFSA/HRS/SCCM/SCCT/SCMR/STS 2012 appropriate use criteria for diagnostic cath-
eterization: a report of the American College of Car-
diology Foundation Appropriate Use Criteria TaskForce, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography andInterventions, American Association for Thoracic Sur-gery, American Heart Association, American Society ofEchocardiography, American Society of Nuclear Car-diology, Heart Failure Society of America, Heart
Rhythm Society, Society of Critical Care Medicine,
Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography,Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance, andSociety of Thoracic Surgeons. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2012;59:1995 –2027 .
7.Levine GN, Bates ER, Blankenship JC, et al. 2015
ACC/AHA/SCAI focused update on primary percuta-
neous coronary intervention for patients with ST-
elevation myocardial infarction: an update of the2011 ACCF/AHA/SCAI guideline for percutaneous cor-onary intervention and the 2013 ACCF/AHA guidelinefor the management of ST-Elevation myocardialinfarction. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2016;67:1235 –1250 .
8.Pathik B, Raman B, Mohd Amin NH, et al. Troponin-
positive chest pain with unobstructed coronary ar-
teries: incremental diagnostic value of cardiovascularmagnetic resonance imaging. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc
Imaging . 2016;17:1146 –1152.
9.Dastidar AG, Rodrigues JCL, Johnson TW, et al.
Myocardial infarction with nonobstructed coronary
arteries: impact of CMR early after presentation. JA m
Coll Cardiol Img . 2017;10:1204 –1206 .
10.Assomull RG, Lyne JC, Keenan N, et al. The role of
cardiovascular magnetic resonance in patients pre-senting with chest pain, raised troponin, and unob-structed coronary arteries. Eur Heart J . 2007;28:1242 –
1249 .
11.Tornvall P, Gerbaud E, Behaghel A, et al. Myocar-
ditis or "true" infarction by cardiac magnetic resonance
in patients with a clinical diagnosis of myocardialinfarction without obstructive coronary disease: a
meta-analysis of individual patient data.
Atheroscle-
rosis. 2015;241:87 –91.
12.Dastidar AG, Baritussio A, De Garate E, et al.
Prognostic role of CMR and conventional risk factors inmyocardial infarction with nonobstructed coronaryarteries. J Am Coll Cardiol Img . 2019;12:1973 –1982 .
13.Greenslade JH, Carlton EW, Van Hise C, et al.
Diagnostic accuracy of a new high-sensitivity troponinI assay and ﬁve accelerated diagnostic pathways for
ruling out acute myocardial infarction and acute cor-onary syndrome. Ann Emerg Med . 2018;71:439 –451,
e3.
14.Raff GL, Hoffmann U, Udelson JE. Trials of imaging
use in the emergency department for acute chest pain.J Am Coll Cardiol Img . 2017;10:338 –349.
15.Cohen M. High-risk acute coronary syndrome pa-
tients with non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction:deﬁnition and treatment. Cardiovasc Drugs Ther .
2008;22:407 –418.
16.Steg PG, FitzGerald G, Fox KA. Risk strati ﬁcation in
non-ST-segment elevation acute coronary syndromes:troponin alone is not enough. Am J Med . 2009;122:
107–108.
17.Pasupathy S, Air T, Dreyer RP, et al. Systematic
review of patients presenting with suspectedmyocardial infarction and nonobstructive coronaryarteries. Circulation . 2015;131:861 –870.
18.Dastidar AG, Rodrigues JC, Ahmed N, et al. The
role of cardiac MRI in patients with troponin-positivechest pain and unobstructed coronary arteries. Curr
Cardiovasc Imaging Rep . 2015;8:28 .
19.Niccoli G, Scalone G, Crea F. Acute myocardial
infarction with no obstructive coronary atheroscle-rosis: mechanisms and management. Eur Heart J .
2015;36:475 –481.
4.1.4. Acute Chest Pain in Patients With Prior
Coronary Artery Bypass Graft (CABG) Surgery
1.Fitzgibbon GM, Kafka HP, Leach AJ, et al. Coronary
bypass graft fate and patient outcome: angiographic
follow-up of 5,065 grafts related to survival andreoperation in 1,388 patients during 25 years. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 1996;28:616 –626.
2.Harskamp RE, Lopes RD, Baisden CE, et al. Saphe-
nous vein graft failure after coronary artery bypasssurgery: pathophysiology, management, and futuredirections. Ann Surg . 2013;257:824 –833.
3.Wolk MJ, Bailey SR, Doherty JU, et al. ACCF/AHA/
ASE/ASNC/HFSA/HRS/SCAI/SCCT/SCMR/STS 2013
multimodality appropriate use criteria for the detec-tion and risk assessment of stable ischemic heart dis-ease: a report of the American College of CardiologyFoundation Appropriate Use Criteria Task Force,
American Heart Association, American Society of
Echocardiography, American Society of Nuclear Car-diology, Heart Failure Society of America, HeartRhythm Society, Society for Cardiovascular Angiog-raphy and Interventions, Society of CardiovascularComputed Tomography, Society for Cardiovascular
Magnetic Resonance, and Society of Thoracic Sur-
geons. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;63:380 –406.
4.Taylor AJ, Cerqueira M, Hodgson JM, et al. ACCF/
SCCT/ACR/AHA/ASE/ASNC/NASCI/SCAI/SCMR 2010
appropriate use criteria for cardiac computed tomog-
raphy: a report of the American College of CardiologyFoundation Appropriate Use Criteria Task Force, theSociety of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography, the
American College of Radiology, the American HeartAssociation, the American Society of Echocardiogra-phy, the American Society of Nuclear Cardiology, the
North American Society for Cardiovascular Imaging,
the Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and In-terventions, and the Society for Cardiovascular Mag-netic Resonance. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2010;56:1864 –
1894 .
5.Sabik JF 3rd. Understanding saphenous vein graft
patency. Circulation . 2011;124:273 –275.
6.Taggart DP. Current status of arterial grafts for
coronary artery bypass grafting. Ann Cardiothorac
Surg. 2013;2:427 –430.
7.Gaudino M, Benedetto U, Fremes S, et al. Radial-
artery or saphenous-vein grafts in coronary-arterybypass surgery. N Engl J Med . 2018;378:2069 –2077 .
8.Fihn SD, Blankenship JC, Alexander KP, et al. 2014
ACC/AHA/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS focused update of theguideline for the diagnosis and management of pa-tients with stable ischemic heart disease: a report ofthe American College of Cardiology/American HeartAssociation Task Force on Practice Guidelines, and theAmerican Association for Thoracic Surgery, Preventive
Cardiovascular Nurses Association, Society for Cardio-
vascular Angiography and Interventions, and Societyof Thoracic Surgeons. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;64:
1929 –1949 .
9.Hammermeister KE, DeRouen TA, Dodge HT. Vari-
ables predictive of survival in patients with coronarydisease. Selection by univariate and multivariate ana-lyses from the clinical, electrocardiographic, exercise,arteriographic, and quantitative angiographic evalua-tions. Circulation . 1979;59:421 –430.
10.Mark DB, Hlatky MA, Harrell FE Jr, et al. Exercise
treadmill score for predicting prognosis in coronaryartery disease. Ann Intern Med . 1987;106:793 –800.
11.Levine GN, Bates ER, Blankenship JC, et al. 2011
ACCF/AHA/SCAI guideline for percutaneous coronary
intervention: a report of the American College ofCardiology Foundation/American Heart AssociationTask Force on Practice Guidelines and the Society forCardiovascular Angiography and Interventions. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2011;58:e44 –122.
12.Hillis LD, Smith PK, Anderson JL, et al. 2011 ACCF/
AHA guideline for coronary artery bypass graft sur-gery: a report of the American College of CardiologyFoundation/American Heart Association Task Force onPractice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2011;58:e123 –
210.
13.Patel MR, Bailey SR, Bonow RO, et al. ACCF/SCAI/
AATS/AHA/ASE/ASNC/HFSA/HRS/SCCM/SCCT/SCMR/STS 2012 appropriate use criteria for diagnostic cath-eterization: a report of the American College of Car-
diology Foundation Appropriate Use Criteria Task
Force, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography andInterventions, American Association for Thoracic Sur-gery, American Heart Association, American Society ofEchocardiography, American Society of Nuclear Car-diology, Heart Failure Society of America, HeartRhythm Society, Society of Critical Care Medicine,
Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography,
Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance, and
Society of Thoracic Surgeons. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2012;59:1995 –2027 .
14.Bittl JA, He Y, Jacobs AK, et al. Bayesian methods
afﬁrm the use of percutaneous coronary intervention
to improve survival in patients with unprotected leftGulati et al . JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
2021 Chest Pain Guideline NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285e260

main coronary artery disease. Circulation . 2013;127:
2177 –2185 .
15.Costa MA, Trentini CA, Schafranski MD, et al. Fac-
tors associated with the development of chronic post-sternotomy pain: a case-control study. Braz J Car-
diovasc Surg . 2015;30:552 –556.
16.van Gulik L, Janssen LI, Ahlers SJ, et al. Risk factors
for chronic thoracic pain after cardiac surgery via
sternotomy. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg . 2011;40:1309 –
1313.
17.Kalso E, Mennander S, Tasmuth T, et al. Chronic
post-sternotomy pain. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand .
2001;45:935 –939.
18.Rashidi S, Elenbaas TW, Hamad MA, et al. Does
removal of steel wires relieve post-sternotomy painafter cardiac surgery? Asian Cardiovasc Thorac Ann .
2013;21:409 –413.
19.Lahtinen P, Kokki H, Hynynen M. Pain after cardiac
surgery: a prospective cohort study of 1-year incidence
and intensity. Anesthesiology . 2006;105:794 –800.
20.Marcassa C, Faggiano P, Greco C, et al.
A retrospective multicenter study on long-term prev-alence of chronic pain after cardiac surgery.J Cardiovasc Med (Hagerstown) . 2015;16:768 –774.
21.Barbero U, Iannaccone M, d ’Ascenzo F, et al. 64
slice-coronary computed tomography sensitivity andspeciﬁcity in the evaluation of coronary artery bypass
graft stenosis: a meta-analysis. Int J Cardiol . 2016;216:
52–57.
4.1.5. Evaluation of Patients With Acute Chest
Pain Receiving Dialysis
1.Saran R, Robinson B, Abbott KC, et al. US renal data
system 2017 annual data report: epidemiology ofkidney disease in the United States. Am J Kidney Dis .
2018;71. A7 .
2.Voroneanu L, Covic A. Arrhythmias in hemodialysis
patients. J Nephrol . 2009;22:716 –725.
3.Herzog CA, Littrell K, Arko C, et al. Clinical charac-
teristics of dialysis patients with acute myocardial
infarction in the United States: a collaborative project
of the United States Renal Data System and the Na-tional Registry of Myocardial Infarction. Circulation .
2007;116:1465 –1472 .
4.Kielstein JT, Abou-Rebyeh F, Hafer C, et al. Right-
sided chest pain at the onset of haemodialysis. Nephrol
Dial Transplant . 2001;16:1493 –1495 .
5.Modi KS, Gross D, Davidman M. The patient devel-
oping chest pain at the onset of haemodialysis ses-
sions —it is not always angina pectoris. Nephrol Dial
Transplant . 1999;14:221 –223.
6.Merritt B, Naamon E, Morris SA. The in ﬂuence of an
Urgent Care Center on the frequency of ED visits in anurban hospital setting. Am J Emerg Med . 2000;18:123 –
125.
7.Weinick RM, Burns RM, Mehrotra A. Many emer-
gency department visits could be managed at urgentcare centers and retail clinics. Health Aff (Millwood) .
2010;29:1630 –1636 .
4.1.6. Evaluation of Acute Chest Pain in Patients
With Cocaine and Methamphetamine Use
1.Finkel JB, Marhefka GD. Rethinking cocaine-
associated chest pain and acute coronary syndromes.Mayo Clin Proc . 2011;86:1198 –1207 .2.DeFilippis E, Singh A, Divakaran S, et al. Cocaine and
marijuana use among young adults with myocardialinfarction. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2018;71:2540 –2551 .
3.Hawley LA, Auten JD, Matteucci MJ, et al. Cardiac
complications of adult methamphetamine exposures.
J Emerg Med . 2013;45:821 –827.
4.McCord J, Jneid H, Hollander JE, et al. Management
of cocaine-associated chest pain and myocardialinfarction: a scienti ﬁc statement from the American
Heart Association Acute Cardiac Care Committee of the
Council on Clinical Cardiology. Circulation . 2008;117:
1897 –1907 .
5.Rezkalla SH, Kloner RA. Cocaine-induced acute
myocardial infarction. Clin Med Res . 2007;5:172 –176.
6.Richards JR, Hamidi S, Grant CD, et al. Metham-
phetamine use and emergency department utilization:
20 Years Later. J Addict . 2017;2017:4050932 .
7.Wei GL, Zheng XZ, Chen KQ, et al. Coronary sinus
ﬂow is reduced in methamphetamine abusers: a
transthoracic echocardiographic study. Int J Cardiovasc
Imaging . 2018;34:1889
–1894 .
8.Paratz ED, Zhao J, Sherwen AK, et al. Is an abnormal
ECG just the tip of the ICE-berg? Examining the utility
of electrocardiography in detectingmethamphetamine-induced cardiac pathology. Heart
Lung Circ . 2017;26:684 –689.
9.Paratz ED, Cunningham NJ, MacIsaac AI. The cardiac
complications of methamphetamines. Heart Lung Circ .
2016;25:325 –332.
4.1.7. Shared Decision-Making in Patients With
Acute Chest Pain
1.Hess EP, Hollander JE, Schaffer JT, et al. Shared
decision making in patients with low risk chest pain:
prospective randomized pragmatic trial. BMJ.
2016;355:i6165 .
2.Hess EP, Knoedler MA, Shah ND, et al. The chest
pain choice decision aid: a randomized trial. Circ Car-
diovasc Qual Outcomes . 2012;5:251 –259.
3.Mayo Clinic. Chest Pain Choice Decision Aid. You-
Tube ; 2016. Available at: https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v ¼LgOagKX_-nA . Accessed July 26, 2021.
4.Elwyn G, Tilburt J, Montori VM. The ethical imper-
ative for shared decision-making. European Journal for
Person Centered Healthcare . 2013;1:129 –213.
5.Stacey D, Legare F, Lewis K, et al. Decision aids for
people facing health treatment or screening decisions.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2017;4:CD001431 .
6.Hess EP. Clinical judgment is not passe when it
comes to identifying patients with acute myocardialinfarction. Evid Based Med . 2016;21:117 .
7.Hess E. Authority Psychotherapy and the authority
of the therapist in the religious Haredi community. Am
J Psychoanal . 2018;78:137 –158.
8.Hess EL, Myers EA, Swithers SE, et al. Associations
between nonnutritive sweetener intake and metabolicsyndrome in adults. J Am Coll Nutr . 2018;37:487 –493.
4.2. Evaluation of Acute Chest Pain With
Nonischemic Cardiac Pathologies
1.Labovitz AJ, Noble VE, Bierig M, et al. Focused
cardiac ultrasound in the emergent setting: aconsensus statement of the American Society ofEchocardiography and American College of Emergency
Physicians. J Am Soc Echocardiogr . 2010;23:1225 –1230 .
2.RofﬁM, Patrono C, Collet JP, et al. 2015 ESC
guidelines for the management of acute coronarysyndromes in patients presenting without persistentST-segment elevation: Task Force for the Management
of Acute Coronary Syndromes in Patients Presenting
Without Persistent ST-Segment Elevation of the Eu-ropean Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J .
2016;37:267 –315.
3.Amsterdam EA, Wenger NK, Brindis RG, et al. 2014
AHA/ACC guideline for the management of patientswith non-ST-elevation acute coronary syndromes: areport of the American College of Cardiology/Amer-
ican Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guide-
lines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;64:e139 –e228 .
4.Douglas PS, Garcia MJ, Haines D, et al. ACCF/ASE/
AHA/ASNC/HFSA/HRS/SCAI/SCCM/SCCT/SCMR 2011appropriate use criteria for echocardiography: a reportof the American College of Cardiology FoundationAppropriate Use Criteria Task Force, American Societyof Echocardiography, American Heart Association,
American Society of Nuclear Cardiology, Heart Failure
Society of America, Heart Rhythm Society, Society forCardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, Societyof Critical Care Medicine, Society of CardiovascularComputed Tomography, and Society for Cardiovascu-lar Magnetic Resonance. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2011;57:
1126 –1166 .
5.Sicari R, Nihoyannopoulos P, Evangelista A, et al.
Stress echocardiography expert consensus statement —
executive summary: European Association of Echo-cardiography (EAE) (a registered branch of the ESC).Eur Heart J . 2009;30:278 –289.
6.Medical Advisory Secretariat. Stress echocardiog-
raphy for the diagnosis of coronary artery disease: anevidence-based analysis. Ont Health Technol Assess
Ser. 2010;10:1 –61.
4.2.1. Acute Chest Pain With Suspected Acute
Aortic Syndrome
1.Vilacosta I, San Roman JA. Acute aortic syndrome.
Heart . 2001;85:365 –368.
2.Benjamin EJ, Virani SS, Callaway CW, et al. Heart
disease and stroke statistics —2018 update: a report
from the American Heart Association. Circulation .
2018;137:e67 –e492 .
3.Spittell PC, Spittell JA Jr, Joyce JW, et al. Clinical
features and differential diagnosis of aortic dissection:experience with 236 cases (1980 through 1990). Mayo
Clin Proc . 1993;68:642 –651.
4.Hiratzka LF, Bakris GL, Beckman JA, et al. 2010
ACCF/AHA/AATS/ACR/ASA/SCA/SCAI/SIR/STS/SVMguidelines for the diagnosis and management of pa-tients with thoracic aortic disease. a report of the
American College of Cardiology Foundation/American
Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines,American Association for Thoracic Surgery, AmericanCollege of Radiology,American Stroke Association,Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists, Societyfor Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions,
Society of Interventional Radiology, Society of
Thoracic Surgeons, and Society for Vascular Medicine.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2010;55:e27 –e129 .
5.Mussa FF, Horton JD, Moridzadeh R, et al. Acute
aortic dissection and intramural hematoma: a system-atic review. JAMA . 2016;316:754 –763.JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021 Gulati et al .
NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285 2021 Chest Pain Guidelinee261

6.Vardhanabhuti V, Nicol E, Morgan-Hughes G, et al.
Recommendations for accurate CT diagnosis of sus-pected acute aortic syndrome (AAS) –on behalf of the
British Society of Cardiovascular Imaging (BSCI)/British
Society of Cardiovascular CT (BSCCT). Br J Radiol .
2016;89:20150705 .
4.2.2. Acute Chest Pain With Suspected PE
1.Pollack CV, Schreiber D, Goldhaber SZ, et al. Clinical
characteristics, management, and outcomes of pa-
tients diagnosed with acute pulmonary embolism inthe emergency department: initial report of EMPEROR(Multicenter Emergency Medicine Pulmonary Embo-lism in the Real World Registry). J Am Coll Cardiol .
2011;57:700 –706.
2.Konstantinides SV, Torbicki A, Agnelli G, et al. 2014
ESC guidelines on the diagnosis and management ofacute pulmonary embolism. Eur Heart J . 2014;35:
3033 –3069, 69a-69k .
3.Raja AS, Greenberg JO, Qaseem A, et al. Evaluation
of patients with suspected acute pulmonary embolism:best practice advice from the Clinical GuidelinesCommittee of the American College of Physicians. Ann
Intern Med . 2015;163:701 –711.
4.Ceriani E, Combescure C, Le Gal G, et al. Clinical
prediction rules for pulmonary embolism: a systematicreview and meta-analysis. J Thromb Haemost . 2010;8:
957–970.
5.Alotaibi GS, Wu C, Senthilselvan A, et al. Secular
trends in incidence and mortality of acute venous
thromboembolism: the AB-VTE Population-Based
Study. Am J Med . 2016;129:879.e19 –e25.
6.Smith SB, Geske JB, Kathuria P, et al. Analysis of
national trends in admissions for pulmonary embolism.Chest . 2016;150:35 –45.
7.Cohen AT, Agnelli G, Anderson FA, et al. Venous
thromboembolism (VTE) in Europe. The number of VTEevents and associated morbidity and mortality. Thromb
Haemost . 2007;98:756 –764.
8.Kline JA, Jones AE, Shapiro NI, et al. Multicenter,
randomized trial of quantitative pretest probability toreduce unnecessary medical radiation exposure inemergency department patients with chest pain anddyspnea. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging . 2014;7:66 –73.
4.2.3. Acute Chest Pain With Suspected
Myopericarditis
1.Bozkurt B, Colvin M, Cook J, et al. Current diagnostic
and treatment strategies for speci ﬁc dilated cardio-
myopathies: a scienti ﬁc statement from the American
Heart Association. Circulation . 2016;134:e579 –e646 .
2.Ferreira VM, Schulz-Menger J, Holmvang G, et al.
Cardiovascular magnetic resonance in nonischemic
myocardial in ﬂammation: expert recommendations.
J Am Coll Cardiol . 2018;72:3158 –3176 .
3.Tornvall P, Gerbaud E, Behaghel A, et al. Myocar-
ditis or "true" infarction by cardiac magnetic resonancein patients with a clinical diagnosis of myocardialinfarction without obstructive coronary disease: ameta-analysis of individual patient data. Atheroscle-
rosis. 2015;241:87 –91.
4.Dastidar AG, Baritussio A, De Garate E, et al. Prog-
nostic role of CMR and conventional risk factors inmyocardial infarction with nonobstructed coronaryarteries. J Am Coll Cardiol Img . 2019;12:1973 –1982 .
5.Lintingre PF, Nivet H, Clement-Guinaudeau S, et al.
High-resolution late gadolinium enhancementmagnetic resonance for the diagnosis of myocardial
infarction with nonobstructed coronary arteries. JA m
Coll Cardiol Img . 2020;13:1135 –1148 .
6.Dastidar AG, Rodrigues JCL, Johnson TW, et al.
Myocardial infarction with nonobstructed coronaryarteries: impact of CMR early after presentation. JA m
Coll Cardiol Img . 2017;10:1204 –1206 .
7.Klein AL, Abbara S, Agler DA, et al. American Society
of Echocardiography clinical recommendations for
multimodality cardiovascular imaging of patients withpericardial disease. J Am Soc Echocardiogr . 2013;26:
965 –1012, e15 .
8.Adler Y, Charron P, Imazio M, et al. 2015 ESC
guidelines for the diagnosis and management of peri-cardial diseases: the Task Force for the Diagnosis andManagement of Pericardial Diseases of the EuropeanSociety of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J . 2015;36:
2921 –2964 .
9.Taylor AM, Dymarkowski S, Verbeken EK, et al.
Detection of pericardial in ﬂammation with late-
enhancement cardiac magnetic resonance imaging:initial results. Eur Radiol . 2006;16:569 –574.
10.Young PM, Glockner JF, Williamson EE, et al. MR
imaging ﬁndings in 76 consecutive surgically proven
cases of pericardial disease with CT and pathologiccorrelation. Int J Cardiovasc Imaging . 2012;28:1099 –
1109 .
11.Aquaro GD, Perfetti M, Camastra G, et al. Cardiac
MR with late gadolinium enhancement in acute
myocarditis with preserved systolic function: ITAMY
study. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2017;70:1977 –1987 .
12.Grani C, Buechel RR, Kaufmann PA, et al. Multi-
modality imaging in individuals with anomalouscoronary arteries. J Am Coll Cardiol Img
. 2017;10:471 –
481.
13.Hammer MM, Raptis CA, Javidan-Nejad C, et al.
Accuracy of computed tomography ﬁndings in acute
pericarditis. Acta Radiol . 2014;55:1197 –1202 .
14.Imazio M, Demichelis B, Cecchi E, et al. Cardiac
troponin I in acute pericarditis. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2003;42:2144 –2148 .
15.Caforio AL, Pankuweit S, Arbustini E, et al. Current
state of knowledge on aetiology, diagnosis, manage-ment, and therapy of myocarditis: a position statement
of the European Society of Cardiology Working Group
on Myocardial and Pericardial Diseases. Eur Heart J .
2013;34:2636 –2648, 48a-48d .
16.Pathik B, Raman B, Mohd Amin NH, et al. Troponin-
positive chest pain with unobstructed coronary ar-teries: incremental diagnostic value of cardiovascularmagnetic resonance imaging. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc
Imaging . 2016;17:1146 –1152.
17.Cosyns B, Plein S, Nihoyanopoulos P, et al. Euro-
pean Association of Cardiovascular Imaging (EACVI)
position paper: multimodality imaging in pericardial
disease. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging . 2015;16:12 –31.
4.2.4. Acute Chest Pain With Valvular Heart
Disease
1.Morrison GW, Thomas RD, Grimmer SF, et al. Inci-
dence of coronary artery disease in patients with
valvular heart disease. Br Heart J . 1980;44:630 –637.
2.Ahn JH, Kim SM, Park SJ, et al. Coronary microvas-
cular dysfunction as a mechanism of angina in severeAS: prospective adenosine-stress CMR study. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2016;67:1412 –1422 .
3.Otto CM, Nishimura RA, Bonow RO, et al. 2020 ACC/
AHA guideline for the management of patients with
valvular heart disease: a report of the American Col-lege of Cardiology/American Heart Association JointCommittee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2021;77:e25 –e197 .
4.Hiratzka LF, Bakris GL, Beckman JA, et al.
2010 ACCF/AHA/AATS/ACR/ASA/SCA/SCAI/SIR/STS/
SVM guidelines for the diagnosis and managementof patients with thoracic aortic disease: a report ofthe American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on PracticeGuidelines, American Association for Thoracic Sur-gery, American College of Radiology,American Stroke
Association, Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiolo-
gists, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography andInterventions, Society of Interventional Radiology,Society of Thoracic Surgeons, and Society forVascular Medicine. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2010;55:e27 –
e129 .
5.Lang RM, Badano LP, Tsang W, et al. EAE/ASE rec-
ommendations for image acquisition and display usingthree-dimensional echocardiography. Eur Heart J Car-
diovasc Imaging
. 2012;13:1 –46.
6.Doherty JU, Kort S, Mehran R, et al. ACC/AATS/
AHA/ASE/ASNC/HRS/SCAI/SCCT/SCMR/STS 2017
appropriate use criteria for multimodality imaging invalvular heart disease: a report of the American Col-lege of Cardiology Appropriate Use Criteria Task Force,American Association for Thoracic Surgery, AmericanHeart Association, American Society of Echocardiog-
raphy, American Society of Nuclear Cardiology, Heart
Rhythm Society, Society for Cardiovascular Angiog-raphy and Interventions, Society of CardiovascularComputed Tomography, Society for CardiovascularMagnetic Resonance, and Society of Thoracic Sur-geons. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2017;70:1647 –1672 .
4.3. Evaluation of Acute Chest Pain With
Suspected Noncardiac Causes
4.3.1. Evaluation of Acute Chest Pain With
Suspected Gastrointestinal Syndromes
1.Klinkman MS, Stevens D, Goren ﬂo DW. Episodes of
care for chest pain: a preliminary report from MIRNET.Michigan Research Network. J Fam Pract . 1994;38:
345–352.
2.Sengupta JN. An overview of esophageal
sensory receptors. Am J Med . 2000;108(suppl 4a):
87S–89S.
3.Dent J, El-Serag HB, Wallander MA, et al. Epidemi-
ology of gastro-oesophageal re ﬂux disease: a sys-
tematic review. Gut. 2005;54:710 –717.
4.Richter JE. Typical and atypical presentations of
gastroesophageal re ﬂux disease. The role of esopha-
geal testing in diagnosis and management. Gastro-
enterol Clin North Am . 1996;25:75 –102.
5.DeVault KR, Castell DO. Guidelines for the diagnosis
and treatment of gastroesophageal re ﬂux disease.
Practice Parameters Committee of the American Col-lege of Gastroenterology. Arch Intern Med . 1995;155:
2165 –2173 .
6.Hirano I, Richter JE. Practice parameters committee
of the American College of Gasteroenterology. ACGGulati et al . JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
2021 Chest Pain Guideline NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285e262

practice guidelines: esophageal re ﬂux testing. Am J
Gastroenterol . 2007;102:668 –685.
4.3.2. Evaluation of Acute Chest Pain With
Suspected Anxiety and Other PsychosomaticConsiderations
1.Carter C, Maddock R, Amsterdam E, et al. Panic
disorder and chest pain in the coronary care unit.Psychosomatics . 1992;33:302 –309.
2.Kline JA, Shapiro NI, Jones AE, et al. Outcomes and
radiation exposure of emergency department patientswith chest pain and shortness of breath and ultralowpretest probability: a multicenter study. Ann Emerg
Med. 2014;63:281 –288.
3.Webster R, Norman P, Goodacre S, et al. The prev-
alence and correlates of psychological outcomes in
patients with acute non-cardiac chest pain: a system-
atic review. Emerg Med J . 2012;29:267 –273.
4.Eslick GD, Talley NJ. Natural history and predictors
of outcome for non-cardiac chest pain: a prospective4-year cohort study. Neurogastroenterol Motil .
2008;20:989 –997.
5.Foldes-Busque G, Marchand A, Chauny JM, et al.
Unexplained chest pain in the ED: could it be panic?Am J Emerg Med . 2011;29:743 –751.
6.Musey PI Jr, Kline JA. Emergency department car-
diopulmonary evaluation of low-risk chest pain pa-
tients with self-reported stress and anxiety. J Emerg
Med. 2017;52:273 –279.
7.Al-Ani M, Winchester DE. Prevalence and overlap of
noncardiac conditions in the evaluation of low-riskacute chest pain patients. Crit Pathw Cardiol .
2015;14:97 –102.
8.Czarnecki A, Wang JT, Tu JV, et al. The role of pri-
mary care physician and cardiologist follow-up forlow-risk patients with chest pain after emergency
department assessment. Am Heart J . 2014;168:289 –
295.
9.White KS, Craft JM, Gervino EV. Anxiety and
hypervigilance to cardiopulmonary sensations in non-cardiac chest pain patients with and without psychi-atric disorders. Behav Res Ther . 2010;48:394 –401.
10.Burgstaller JM, Jenni BF, Steurer J, et al. Treat-
ment ef ﬁcacy for non-cardiovascular chest pain: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS One .
2014;9:e104722 .
11.Kisely SR, Campbell LA, Yelland MJ, et al. Psycho-
logical interventions for symptomatic management of
non-speci ﬁc chest pain in patients with normal coro-
nary anatomy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2015:
CD004101 .
12.Mitchell AM, Garvey JL, Chandra A, et al. Pro-
spective multicenter study of quantitative pretestprobability assessment to exclude acute coronarysyndrome for patients evaluated in emergencydepartment chest pain units. Ann Emerg Med .
2006;47:447 .
13.Hoorweg BB, Willemsen RT, Cleef LE, et al. Fre-
quency of chest pain in primary care, diagnostic testsperformed and ﬁnal diagnoses. Heart . 2017;103:1727 –
1732 .
14.Glombiewski JA, Rief W, Bosner S, et al. The course
of nonspeci ﬁc chest pain in primary care: symptom
persistence and health care usage. Arch Intern Med .
2010;170:251 –255.15.Engel GL. Sudden and rapid death during psycho-
logical stress. Folklore or folk wisdom? Ann Intern Med .
1971;74:771 –782.
16.Samuels MA. The brain-heart connection. Circula-
tion. 2007;116:77 –84.
17.Rudehill A, Olsson GL, Sundqvist K, et al. ECG ab-
normalities in patients with subarachnoid haemorrhage
and intracranial tumours. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychia-
try. 1987;50:1375 –1381 .
18.Wittstein IS, Thiemann DR, Lima JA, et al. Neuro-
humoral features of myocardial stunning due to sud-den emotional stress. N Engl J Med . 2005;352:539 –
548.
19.Medina de Chazal H, Del Buono MG, Keyser-
Marcus L, et al. Stress cardiomyopathy diagnosis andtreatment: JACC state-of-the-art review. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2018;72:1955 –1971.
20.Bass C, Wade C, Hand D, et al. Patients with angina
with normal and near normal coronary arteries: clinical
and psychosocial state 12 months after angiography.
Br Med J (Clin Res Ed) . 1983;287:1505 –1508 .
21.Mukerji V, Beitman BD, Alpert MA. Chest pain and
angiographically normal coronary arteries. Implica-tions for treatment. Tex Heart Inst J . 1993;20:170 –179.
22.Lichtlen PR, Bargheer K, Wenzlaff P. Long-term
prognosis of patients with anginalike chest pain and
normal coronary angiographic ﬁndings. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 1995;25:1013 –1018 .
23.Esler JL, Barlow DH, Woolard RH, et al. A brief
cognitive-behavioral intervention for patients with
noncardiac chest pain. Behavior Therapy . 2003;34:
129–148.
24.Aikens JE, Zvolensky MJ, Eifert GH. Differential
fear of cardiopulmonary sensations in emergency roomnoncardiac chest pain patients. J Behav Med . 2001;24:
155–167.
25.Eifert GH, Zvolensky MJ, Lejuez CW. Heart-focused
anxiety and chest pain: a conceptual and clinical re-view. Clinical Psychology Science and Practice . 2006;7:
403 –417.
26.Esler JL, Bock BC. Psychological treatments for
noncardiac chest pain: recommendations for a new
approach. J Psychosom Res . 2004;56:263 –269.
27.Altintas E, Yigit F, Taskintuna N. The impact of
psychiatric disorders with cardiac syndrome X onquality of life: 3 months prospective study. Int J Clin
Exp Med . 2014;7:3520 –3527 .
28.Schwarz J, Prashad A, Winchester DE. Prevalence
and implications of severe anxiety in a prospectivecohort of acute chest pain patients. Crit Pathw Cardiol .
2015;14:44 –47.
29.Foldes-Busque G, Denis I, Poitras J, et al. A closer
look at the relationships between panic attacks,
emergency department visits and non-cardiac chest
pain. J Health Psychol . 2017:1359105316683785 .
30.Campbell KA, Madva EN, Villegas AC, et al. Non-
cardiac chest pain: a review for the consultation-liaisonpsychiatrist. Psychosomatics . 2017;58:252 –265.
4.3.3. Evaluation of Acute Chest Pain in Patients
With Sickle Cell Disease
1.Platt OS, Brambilla DJ, Rosse WF, et al. Mortality in
sickle cell disease. Life expectancy and risk factors forearly death. N Engl J Med . 1994;330:1639 –1644 .2.Thomas AN, Pattison C, Serjeant GR. Causes of
death in sickle-cell disease in Jamaica. Br Med J (Clin
Res Ed) . 1982;285:633 –635.
3.
Vichinsky EP, Styles LA, Colangelo LH, et al. Acute
chest syndrome in sickle cell disease: clinical presen-tation and course. Cooperative Study of Sickle Cell
Disease. Blood . 1997;89:1787 –1792 .
4.Martin CR, Johnson CS, Cobb C, et al. Myocardial
infarction in sickle cell disease. J Natl Med Assoc .
1996;88:428 –432.
5.Ogunbayo GO, Misumida N, Olorunfemi O, et al.
Comparison of outcomes in patients having acutemyocardial infarction with versus without sickle-cellanemia. Am J Cardiol . 2017;120:1768 –1771.
5. EVALUATION OF PATIENTS
WITH STABLE CHEST PAIN
5.1. Patients With No Known CAD Presenting
With Stable Chest Pain
1.Juarez-Orozco LE, Saraste A, Capodanno D, et al.
Impact of a decreasing pre-test probability on theperformance of diagnostic tests for coronary arterydisease. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging . 2019;20:
1198 –1207 .
2.Winther S, Schmidt SE, Mayrhofer T, et al. Incor-
porating coronary calci ﬁcation into pre-test assess-
ment of the likelihood of coronary artery disease. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2020;76:2421 –2432 .
5.1.1. Pretest Risk Probability to Guide Need for
Stress and Anatomic Tests
1.Juarez-Orozco LE, Saraste A, Capodanno D, et al.
Impact of a decreasing pre-test probability on the
performance of diagnostic tests for coronary artery
disease. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging . 2019;20:
1198 –1207 .
2.Winther S, Schmidt SE, Mayrhofer T, et al. Incor-
porating coronary calci ﬁcation into pre-test assess-
ment of the likelihood of coronary artery disease. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2020;76:2421 –2432 .
3.Genders TS, Steyerberg EW, Alkadhi H, et al.
A clinical prediction rule for the diagnosis of coronary
artery disease: validation, updating, and extension. Eur
Heart J . 2011;32:1316 –1330 .
4.Fordyce CB, Douglas PS, Roberts RS, et al. Identi-
ﬁcation of patients with stable chest pain deriving
minimal value from noninvasive testing: the PROMISEminimal-risk tool, a secondary analysis of a random-ized clinical trial. JAMA Cardiol . 2017;2:400 –408.
5.Genders TS, Steyerberg EW, Hunink MG, et al. Pre-
diction model to estimate presence of coronary arterydisease: retrospective pooled analysis of existing co-
horts. BMJ. 2012;344:e3485 .
5.1.2. Low-Risk Patients With Stable Chest Pain
and No Known CAD
1.Genders TS, Steyerberg EW, Alkadhi H, et al.
A clinical prediction rule for the diagnosis of coronaryartery disease: validation, updating, and extension. Eur
Heart J . 2011;32:1316 –1330 .
2.Fordyce CB, Douglas PS, Roberts RS, et al. Identi ﬁ-
cation of patients with stable chest pain derivingJACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021 Gulati et al .
NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285 2021 Chest Pain Guidelinee263

minimal value from noninvasive testing: the PROMISE
minimal-risk tool, a secondary analysis of a random-ized clinical trial. JAMA Cardiol . 2017;2:400 –408.
3.Genders TS, Steyerberg EW, Hunink MG, et al. Pre-
diction model to estimate presence of coronary artery
disease: retrospective pooled analysis of existing co-
horts. BMJ. 2012;344:e3485 .
4.Juarez-Orozco LE, Saraste A, Capodanno D, et al.
Impact of a decreasing pre-test probability on theperformance of diagnostic tests for coronary arterydisease. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging . 2019;20:
1198 –1207 .
5.Winther S, Schmidt SE, Mayrhofer T, et al. Incor-
porating coronary calci ﬁcation into pre-test assess-
ment of the likelihood of coronary artery disease. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2020;76:2421 –2432 .
6.Lubbers M, Coenen A, Kof ﬂard M, et al. Compre-
hensive cardiac CT with myocardial perfusion imagingversus functional testing in suspected coronary arterydisease: the multicenter, randomized CRESCENT-IItrial. J Am Coll Cardiol Img . 2018;11:1625 –1636 .
7.Lubbers M, Dedic A, Coenen A, et al. Calcium im-
aging and selective computed tomography angiog-
raphy in comparison to functional testing forsuspected coronary artery disease: the multicentre,randomized CRESCENT trial. Eur Heart J . 2016;37:
1232 –1243 .
8.Chang SM, Nabi F, Xu J, et al. The coronary artery
calcium score and stress myocardial perfusion imagingprovide independent and complementary prediction of
cardiac risk. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2009;54:1872 –1882 .
9.Budoff MJ, Mayrhofer T, Ferencik M, et al. Prog-
nostic value of coronary artery calcium in the PROMISEstudy (prospective multicenter imaging study forevaluation of chest pain). Circulation . 2017;136:1993 –
2005 .
10.Shaw LJ, Mieres JH, Hendel RH, et al. Comparative
effectiveness of exercise electrocardiography with or
without myocardial perfusion single photon emission
computed tomography in women with suspected cor-onary artery disease: results from the What Is theOptimal Method for Ischemia Evaluation in Women(WOMEN) trial. Circulation . 2011;124:1239 –1249 .
11.Douglas PS, Hoffmann U. Anatomical versus func-
tional testing for coronary artery disease. N Engl J
Med. 2015;373:91 .
12.Hochman JS, Reynolds HR, Bangalore S, et al.
Baseline characteristics and risk pro ﬁles of participants
in the ISCHEMIA randomized clinical trial. JAMA Car-
diol. 2019;4:273 –286
.
13.Spertus JA, Jones PG, Maron DJ, et al. Health
status after invasive or conservative care in coronaryand advanced kidney disease. N Engl J Med . 2020;382:
1619 –1628 .
14.Rozanski A, Gransar H, Hayes SW, et al. Temporal
trends in the frequency of inducible myocardial
ischemia during cardiac stress testing: 1991 to 2009.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2013;61:1054 –1065 .
15.Cheng VY, Berman DS, Rozanski A, et al. Perfor-
mance of the traditional age, sex, and anginatypicality-based approach for estimating pretestprobability of angiographically signi ﬁcant coronary
artery disease in patients undergoing coronary
computed tomographic angiography: results from themultinational coronary CT angiography evaluation forclinical outcomes: an international multicenter registry
(CONFIRM). Circulation . 2011;124:2423 –2432, 1-8 .
16.Baskaran L, Danad I, Gransar H, et al. A comparison
of the updated Diamond-Forrester, CAD Consortium,and CONFIRM history-based risk scores for predictingobstructive coronary artery disease in patients withstable chest pain: the SCOT-HEART Coronary CTA
cohort. J Am Coll Cardiol Img . 2019;12:1392 –1400 .
17.Ferreira AM, Marques H, Tralhao A, et al. Pre-test
probability of obstructive coronary stenosis in patients
undergoing coronary CT angiography: comparative
performance of the modi ﬁed diamond-Forrester al-
gorithm versus methods incorporating cardiovascularrisk factors. Int J Cardiol . 2016;222:346 –351.
18.Foldyna B, Udelson JE, Karady J, et al. Pretest
probability for patients with suspected obstructivecoronary artery disease: re-evaluating Diamond-For-rester for the contemporary era and clinical implica-tions: insights from the PROMISE trial. Eur Heart J
Cardiovasc Imaging . 2019;20:574 –581.
19.Bittencourt MS, Hulten E, Polonsky TS, et al. Eu-
ropean Society of Cardiology-recommended coronary
artery disease consortium pretest probability scores
more accurately predict obstructive coronary diseaseand cardiovascular events than the Diamond and For-rester score: the Partners registry. Circulation .
2016;134:201 –211.
20.Patel MR, Peterson ED, Dai D, et al. Low diagnostic
yield of elective coronary angiography. N Engl J Med .
2010;362:886 –895.
21.Patel MR, Dai D, Hernandez AF, et al. Prevalence
and predictors of nonobstructive coronary artery dis-ease identi ﬁed with coronary angiography in contem-
porary clinical practice. Am Heart J . 2014;167:846 –852
e2.
22.Knuuti J, Wijns W, Saraste A, et al. 2019 ESC
guidelines for the diagnosis and management of
chronic coronary syndromes. Eur Heart J . 2020;41:
407 –477.
5.1.3. Intermediate-High Risk Patients With
Stable Chest Pain and No Known CAD
1.Dewey M, Rief M, Martus P, et al. Evaluation of
computed tomography in patients with atypical anginaor chest pain clinically referred for invasive coronaryangiography: randomised controlled trial. BMJ.
2016;355:i5441 .
2.Meijboom WB, Meijs MF, Schuijf JD, et al. Diagnostic
accuracy of 64-slice computed tomography coronary
angiography: a prospective, multicenter, multivendor
study. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2008;52:2135 –2144 .
3.Budoff MJ, Dowe D, Jollis JG, et al. Diagnostic
performance of 64-multidetector row coronary
computed tomographic angiography for evaluation ofcoronary artery stenosis in individuals without knowncoronary artery disease: results from the prospectivemulticenter ACCURACY (Assessment by CoronaryComputed Tomographic Angiography of Individuals
Undergoing Invasive Coronary Angiography) trial. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2008;52:1724 –1732 .
4.Miller JM, Rochitte CE, Dewey M, et al. Diagnostic
performance of coronary angiography by 64-row CT.
N Engl J Med . 2008;359:2324 –2336 .
5.Chang H-J, Lin FY, Gebow D, et al. Selective referral
using CCTA versus direct referral for individuals
referred to invasive coronary angiography forsuspected CAD: a randomized, controlled, open-label
trial. J Am Coll Cardiol Img . 2019;12:1303 –1312.
6.Sharma A, Coles A, Sekaran NK, et al. Stress testing
versus CT angiography in patients with diabetes andsuspected coronary artery disease. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2019;73:893 –902.
7.Min JK, Koduru S, Dunning AM, et al. Coronary CT
angiography versus myocardial perfusion imaging for
near-term quality of life, cost and radiation exposure: aprospective multicenter randomized pilot trial.J Cardiovasc Comput Tomogr . 2012;6:274 –283.
8.Douglas PS, Hoffmann U, Patel MR, et al. Outcomes
of anatomical versus functional testing for coronaryartery disease. N Engl J Med . 2015;372:1291 –1300 .
9.SCOT-HEART Investigators. Coronary CT angiog-
raphy and 5-year risk of myocardial infarction. N Engl J
Med. 2018;379:924 –933.
10.SCOT-HEART Investigators. CT coronary angiog-
raphy in patients with suspected angina due to coronaryheart disease (SCOT-HEART): an open-label, parallel-group, multicentre trial. Lancet . 2015;385:2383 –2391 .
11.McKavanagh P, Lusk L, Ball PA, et al. A comparison
of cardiac computerized tomography and exercisestress electrocardiogram test for the investigation ofstable chest pain: the clinical results of the CAPP
randomized prospective trial. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc
Imaging
. 2015;16:441 –448.
12.Douglas PS, Pontone G, Hlatky MA, et al. Clinical
outcomes of fractional ﬂow reserve by computed
tomographic angiography-guided diagnostic strategies
vs. usual care in patients with suspected coronary ar-tery disease: the prospective longitudinal trial ofFFR(CT): outcome and resource impacts study. Eur
Heart J . 2015;36:3359 –3367 .
13.Fihn SD, Gardin JM, Abrams J, et al. 2012 ACCF/
AHA/ACP/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS guideline for thediagnosis and management of patients with stableischemic heart disease: a report of the American Col-lege of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Asso-
ciation Task Force on Practice Guidelines, and the
American College of Physicians, American Associationfor Thoracic Surgery, Preventive Cardiovascular NursesAssociation, Society for Cardiovascular Angiographyand Interventions, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2012;60:e44 –e164 .
14.Douglas PS, Garcia MJ, Haines D, et al. ACCF/ASE/
AHA/ASNC/HFSA/HRS/SCAI/SCCM/SCCT/SCMR 2011
appropriate use criteria for echocardiography: a report
of the American College of Cardiology FoundationAppropriate Use Criteria Task Force, American Societyof Echocardiography, American Heart Association,American Society of Nuclear Cardiology, Heart FailureSociety of America, Heart Rhythm Society, Society for
Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, Society
of Critical Care Medicine, Society of CardiovascularComputed Tomography, and Society for Cardiovascu-lar Magnetic Resonance. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2011;57:
1126 –1166 .
15.Gurunathan S, Zacharias K, Akhtar M, et al. Cost-
effectiveness of a management strategy based onexercise echocardiography versus exercise electrocar-
diography in patients presenting with suspected
angina during long term follow up: a randomizedstudy. Int J Cardiol . 2018;259:1 –7.
16.Carpeggiani C, Landi P, Michelassi C, et al. Stress
echocardiography positivity predicts cancer death.J Am Heart Assoc . 2017;6:e007104 .Gulati et al . JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
2021 Chest Pain Guideline NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285e264

17.Hoffmann U, Ferencik M, Udelson JE, et al. Prog-
nostic value of noninvasive cardiovascular testing inpatients with stable chest pain: insights from thePROMISE trial (Prospective Multicenter Imaging Study
for Evaluation of Chest Pain). Circulation . 2017;135:
2320 –2332 .
18.Abdelmoneim SS, Ball CA, Mantovani F, et al.
Prognostic utility of stress testing and cardiac bio-markers in menopausal women at low to intermediaterisk for coronary artery disease (SMART Study): 5-yearoutcome. J Womens Health (Larchmt) . 2018;27:542 –
551.
19.Cortigiani L, Urluescu ML, Coltelli M, et al.
Apparent declining prognostic value of a negativestress echocardiography based on regional wall motion
abnormalities in patients with normal resting left
ventricular function due to the changing referral pro-ﬁle of the population under study. Circ Cardiovasc
Imaging . 2019;12:e008564 .
20.Gibbons RJ, Hodge DO, Berman DS, et al. Long-
term outcome of patients with intermediate-risk ex-ercise electrocardiograms who do not have myocardialperfusion defects on radionuclide imaging. Circulation .
1999;100:2140 –2145 .
21.Rozanski A, Gransar H, Min JK, et al. Long-term
mortality following normal exercise myocardial
perfusion SPECT according to coronary disease riskfactors. J Nucl Cardiol . 2014;21:341 –350.
22.Bourque JM, Holland BH, Watson DD, et al.
Achieving an exercise workload of >or¼10 metabolic
equivalents predicts a very low risk of inducibleischemia: does myocardial perfusion imaging have arole? J Am Coll Cardiol . 2009;54:538 –545.
23.Shaw LJ, Wilson PW, Hachamovitch R, et al.
Improved near-term coronary artery disease risk clas-siﬁcation with gated stress myocardial perfusion
SPECT. J Am Coll Cardiol Img . 2010;3:1139 –1148 .
24.Shaw LJ, Min JK, Hachamovitch R, et al. Nomo-
grams for estimating coronary artery disease prognosis
with gated stress myocardial perfusion SPECT. J Nucl
Cardiol . 2012;19:43 –52.
25.Uretsky S, Rozanski A. Long-term outcomes
following a normal stress myocardial perfusion scan.J Nucl Cardiol . 2013;20:715 –718.
26.Patel KK, Al Badarin F, Chan PS, et al. Randomized
comparison of clinical effectiveness of pharmacologicSPECT and PET MPI in symptomatic CAD patients. JA m
Coll Cardiol Img . 2019;12:1821 –1831 .
27.Dorbala S, Di Carli MF, Beanlands RS, et al. Prog-
nostic value of stress myocardial perfusion positronemission tomography: results from a multicenter
observational registry. J Am Coll Cardiol
. 2013;61:176 –
184.
28.Kay J, Dorbala S, Goyal A, et al. In ﬂuence of sex on
risk strati ﬁcation with stress myocardial perfusion Rb-
82 positron emission tomography: results from thePET (Positron Emission Tomography) PrognosisMulticenter Registry. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2013;62:1866 –
1876 .
29.Greenwood JP, Maredia N, Younger JF, et al. Car-
diovascular magnetic resonance and single-photon
emission computed tomography for diagnosis of cor-
onary heart disease (CE-MARC): a prospective trial.Lancet . 2012;379:453 –460.
30.Schwitter J, Wacker CM, Wilke N, et al. MR-
IMPACT II: Magnetic Resonance Imaging forMyocardial Perfusion Assessment in Coronary artery
disease Trial: perfusion-cardiac magnetic resonance vs.single-photon emission computed tomography for thedetection of coronary artery disease: a comparative
multicentre, multivendor trial. Eur Heart J . 2013;34:
775–781.
31.Hamon M, Fau G, Nee G, et al. Meta-analysis of the
diagnostic performance of stress perfusion cardiovas-cular magnetic resonance for detection of coronary
artery disease. J Cardiovasc Magn Reson . 2010;12:29 .
32.Jaarsma C, Leiner T, Bekkers SC, et al. Diagnostic
performance of noninvasive myocardial perfusion im-aging using single-photon emission computed to-
mography, cardiac magnetic resonance, and positron
emission tomography imaging for the detection ofobstructive coronary artery disease: a meta-analysis.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2012;59:1719 –1728 .
33.Schwitter J, Wacker CM, Wilke N, et al. Superior
diagnostic performance of perfusion-cardiovascularmagnetic resonance versus SPECT to detect coronaryartery disease: the secondary endpoints of the multi-center multivendor MR-IMPACT II (Magnetic Reso-nance Imaging for Myocardial Perfusion Assessment inCoronary Artery Disease Trial). J Cardiovasc Magn
Reson . 2012;14:61 .
34.Greenwood JP, Ripley DP, Berry C, et al. Effect of
care guided by cardiovascular magnetic resonance,myocardial perfusion scintigraphy, or NICE guidelines
on subsequent unnecessary angiography rates: the CE-
MARC 2 randomized clinical trial. JAMA . 2016;316:
1051 –1060 .
35.Nagel E, Greenwood JP, McCann GP, et al. Mag-
netic resonance perfusion or fractional ﬂow reserve in
coronary disease. N Engl J Med . 2019;380:2418 –2428 .
36.Knuuti J, Ballo H, Juarez-Orozco LE, et al. The
performance of non-invasive tests to rule-in and rule-out signi ﬁcant coronary artery stenosis in patients with
stable angina: a meta-analysis focused on post-testdisease probability. Eur Heart J . 2018;39:3322 –3330 .
37.Danad I, Raijmakers PG, Driessen RS, et al. Com-
parison of coronary CT angiography, SPECT, PET, andhybrid imaging for diagnosis of ischemic heart disease
determined by fractional ﬂow reserve. JAMA Cardiol
.
2017;2:1100 –1107 .
38.Neglia D, Rovai D, Caselli C, et al. Detection of
signiﬁcant coronary artery disease by noninvasive
anatomical and functional imaging. Circ Cardiovasc
Imaging . 2015;8:e002179 .
39.Danad I, Szymonifka J, Twisk JWR, et al. Diagnostic
performance of cardiac imaging methods to diagnoseischaemia-causing coronary artery disease whendirectly compared with fractional ﬂow reserve as a
reference standard: a meta-analysis. Eur Heart J .
2017;38:991 –998.
40.Shaw LJ, Mieres JH, Hendel RH, et al. Compar-
ative effectiveness of exercise electrocardiographywith or without myocardial perfusion single photonemission computed tomography in women withsuspected coronary artery disease: results from theWhat Is the Optimal Method for Ischemia Evaluation
in Women (WOMEN) trial. Circulation . 2011;124:1239 –
1249 .
41.Mieres JH, Gulati M, Bairey Merz N, et al. Role of
noninvasive testing in the clinical evaluation of womenwith suspected ischemic heart disease: a consensusstatement from the American Heart Association. Cir-
culation . 2014;130:350 –379.42.Mark DB, Shaw L, Harrell FE Jr, et al. Prognostic
value of a treadmill exercise score in outpatients withsuspected coronary artery disease. N Engl J Med .
1991;325:849 –853.
43.Mark DB, Hlatky MA, Harrell FE Jr, et al. Exercise
treadmill score for predicting prognosis in coronaryartery disease. Ann Intern Med . 1987;106:793 –800.
44.Lauer MS, Pothier CE, Magid DJ, et al. An exter-
nally validated model for predicting long-term survivalafter exercise treadmill testing in patients with sus-pected coronary artery disease and a normal electro-cardiogram. Ann Intern Med . 2007;147:821 –828.
45.Gulati M, Black HR, Shaw LJ, et al. The prognostic
value of a nomogram for exercise capacity in women.N Engl J Med . 2005;353:468 –475.
46.Ardestani A, Ahlberg AW, Katten DM, et al. Risk
strati ﬁcation using line source attenuation correction
with rest/stress Tc-99m sestamibi SPECT myocardial
perfusion imaging. J Nucl Cardiol . 2014;21:118 –126.
47.van Dijk JD, Mouden M, Ottervanger JP, et al.
Value of attenuation correction in stress-onlymyocardial perfusion imaging using CZT-SPECT.
J Nucl Cardiol . 2017;24:395 –401.
48.Gutstein A, Bental T, Solodky A, et al. Prognosis of
stress-only SPECT myocardial perfusion imaging withprone imaging. J Nucl Cardiol
. 2018;25:809 –816.
49.Huang JY, Yen RF, Lee WC, et al. Improved diag-
nostic accuracy of thallium-201 myocardial perfusionsingle-photon emission computed tomography withCT attenuation correction. J Nucl Cardiol . 2019;26:
1584 –1595 .
50.Huang JY, Huang CK, Yen RF, et al. Diagnostic
performance of attenuation-corrected myocardialperfusion imaging for coronary artery disease: a sys-tematic review and meta-analysis. J Nucl Med .
2016;57:1893 –1898 .
51.Ito S, Endo A, Okada T, et al. Comparison of CTAC
and prone imaging for the detection of coronary arterydisease using CZT SPECT. Ann Nucl Med . 2017;31:629 –
635.
52.Gibbons RJ, Carryer D, Liu H, et al. Use of echo-
cardiography in outpatients with chest pain andnormal resting electrocardiograms referred to MayoClinic Rochester. Am Heart J . 2018;196:49 –55.
53.Douglas PS, De Bruyne B, Pontone G, et al. 1-year
outcomes of FFRCT-guided care in patients with sus-pected coronary disease: the PLATFORM Study. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2016;68:435 –445.
54.Fairbairn TA, Nieman K, Akasaka T, et al. Real-
world clinical utility and impact on clinical decision-
making of coronary computed tomographyangiography-derived fractional ﬂow reserve: lessons
from the ADVANCE Registry. Eur Heart J . 2018;39:
3701 –3711.
55.Patel MR, Norgaard BL, Fairbairn TA, et al. 1-Year
impact on medical practice and clinical outcomes ofFFRCT: the ADVANCE registry. J Am Coll Cardiol Img .
2019;13:97 –105.
56.Min JK, Leipsic J, Pencina MJ, et al. Diagnostic
accuracy of fractional ﬂow reserve from anatomic CT
angiography. JAMA . 2012;308:1237 –1245 .
57.Norgaard BL, Leipsic J, Gaur S, et al. Diagnostic
performance of noninvasive fractional ﬂow reserve
derived from coronary computed tomography angi-
ography in suspected coronary artery disease: the NXTtrial (Analysis of Coronary Blood Flow Using CTJACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021 Gulati et al .
NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285 2021 Chest Pain Guidelinee265

Angiography: Next Steps). J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;63:
1145 –1155.
58.Andreini D, Modolo R, Katagiri Y, et al. Impact of
fractional ﬂow reserve derived from coronary
computed tomography angiography on heart teamtreatment decision-making in patients with multi-
vessel coronary artery disease: insights from the
SYNTAX III REVOLUTION Trial. Circ Cardiovasc Interv .
2019;12:e007607 .
59.Abidov A, Gallagher MJ, Chinnaiyan KM, et al.
Clinical effectiveness of coronary computed tomo-graphic angiography in the triage of patients to cardiaccatheterization and revascularization after inconclu-sive stress testing: results of a 2-year prospective trial.
J Nucl Cardiol . 2009;16:701 –713.
60.Christman MP, Bittencourt MS, Hulten E, et al.
Yield of downstream tests after exercise treadmill
testing: a prospective cohort study. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2014;63:1264 –1274 .
61.Shaw LJ, Hausleiter J, Achenbach S, et al. Coronary
computed tomographic angiography as a gatekeeperto invasive diagnostic and surgical procedures: resultsfrom the multicenter CONFIRM (Coronary CT Angiog-raphy Evaluation for Clinical Outcomes: an Interna-
tional Multicenter) registry. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2012;60:2103 –2114.
62.ISCHEMIA Trial Research Group, Maron DJ,
Hochman JS, et al. International Study of ComparativeHealth Effectiveness with Medical and Invasive Ap-proaches (ISCHEMIA) trial: rationale and design. Am
Heart J . 2018;201:124 –135.
63.Maron DJ, Hochman JS, Reynolds HR, et al. Initial
invasive or conservative strategy for stable coronary
disease. N Engl J Med . 2020;382:1395 –1407 .
64.Schepis T, Gaemperli O, Koep ﬂi P, et al. Added
value of coronary artery calcium score as an adjunct to
gated SPECT for the evaluation of coronary arterydisease in an intermediate-risk population. J Nucl Med .
2007;48:1424 –1430 .
65.Chang SM, Nabi F, Xu J, et al. The coronary artery
calcium score and stress myocardial perfusion imagingprovide independent and complementary prediction ofcardiac risk. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2009;54:1872 –1882 .
66.Bavishi C, Argulian E, Chatterjee S, et al. CACS and
the frequency of stress-induced myocardial ischemia
during MPI: a meta-analysis. J Am Coll Cardiol Img .
2016;9:580 –589.
67.Rozanski A, Gransar H, Wong ND, et al. Use of
coronary calcium scanning for predicting induciblemyocardial ischemia: in ﬂuence of patients ’
clinical
presentation. J Nucl Cardiol . 2007;14:669 –679.
68.Brodov Y, Gransar H, Dey D, et al. Combined
quantitative assessment of myocardial perfusion andcoronary artery calcium score by hybrid 82Rb PET/CT
improves detection of coronary artery disease. J Nucl
Med. 2015;56:1345 –1350 .
69.Ghadri JR, Pazhenkottil AP, Nkoulou RN, et al.
Very high coronary calcium score unmasks obstructivecoronary artery disease in patients with normal SPECTMPI. Heart . 2011;97:998 –1003 .
70.Schenker MP, Dorbala S, Hong EC, et al. Interre-
lation of coronary calci ﬁcation, myocardial ischemia,
and outcomes in patients with intermediate likelihoodof coronary artery disease: a combined positron
emission tomography/computed tomography study.
Circulation . 2008;117:1693 –1700 .71.Marwick TH, Case C, Vasey C, et al. Prediction of
mortality by exercise echocardiography: a strategy forcombination with the Duke Treadmill Score. Circula-
tion. 2001;103:2566 –2571 .
72.Sicari R, Nihoyannopoulos P, Evangelista A, et al.
Stress echocardiography expert consensus statement —
executive summary: European Association of Echo-
cardiography (EAE) (a registered branch of the ESC).Eur Heart J . 2009;30:278 –289.
73.Vitola JV, Wanderley MR Jr, Cerci RJ, et al.
Outcome of patients with high-risk Duke TreadmillScore and normal myocardial perfusion imaging onSPECT. J Nucl Cardiol . 2016;23:1291 –1300 .
74.Boiten HJ, van Domburg RT, Valkema R, et al.
Eleven-year prognostic value of dobutamine stress(99m)Tc-sestamibi myocardial perfusion imaging in
patients with limited exercise capacity. Am J Cardiol .
2015;115:884 –889.
75.Uretsky S, Supariwala A, Gurram S, et al. The
interaction of exercise ability and body mass indexupon long-term outcomes among patients undergoingstress-rest perfusion single-photon emissioncomputed tomography imaging. Am Heart J . 2013;166:
127–133.
76.Bourque JM, Charlton GT, Holland BH, et al.
Prognosis in patients achieving >/¼10 METS on exer-
cise stress testing: was SPECT imaging useful? J Nucl
Cardiol . 2011;18:230 –237.
77.Rozanski A, Gransar H, Hayes SW, et al. Temporal
trends in the frequency of inducible myocardialischemia during cardiac stress testing: 1991 to 2009.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2013;61:1054
–1065 .
78.Patel MR, Peterson ED, Dai D, et al. Low diagnostic
yield of elective coronary angiography. N Engl J Med .
2010;362:886 –895.
79.Patel MR, Dai D, Hernandez AF, et al. Prevalence
and predictors of nonobstructive coronary artery dis-
ease identi ﬁed with coronary angiography in contem-
porary clinical practice. Am Heart J . 2014;167:846 –852
e2.
80.Greenwood JP, Ripley DP, Berry C, et al. Effect of
care guided by cardiovascular magnetic resonance,myocardial perfusion scintigraphy, or NICE guidelineson subsequent unnecessary angiography rates: the CE-MARC 2 randomized clinical trial. JAMA . 2016;316:
1051 –1060 .
81.Juarez-Orozco LE, Saraste A, Capodanno D, et al.
Impact of a decreasing pre-test probability on theperformance of diagnostic tests for coronary arterydisease. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging . 2019;20:
1198 –1207 .
82.Winther S, Schmidt SE, Mayrhofer T, et al. Incor-
porating coronary calci ﬁcation into pre-test assess-
ment of the likelihood of coronary artery disease. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2020;76:2421 –2432 .
83.Lowenstern A, Alexander KP, Hill CL, et al. Age-
related differences in the noninvasive evaluation for
possible coronary artery disease: insights from theProspective Multicenter Imaging Study for Evaluationof Chest Pain (PROMISE) Trial. JAMA Cardiol . 2020;5:
193–201.
84.Chang HJ, Lin FY, Gebow D, et al. Selective referral
using CCTA versus direct referral for individualsreferred to invasive coronary angiography for sus-
pected CAD: a randomized, controlled, open-label
trial. J Am Coll Cardiol Img . 2019;12:1303 –1312.85.Grundy SM, Stone NJ, Bailey AL, et al. 2018
AHA/ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/ADA/AGS/APhA/ASPC/NLA/PCNA guideline on the management ofblood cholesterol: a report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on
Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;73:
e285 –e350 .
86.Fihn SD, Blankenship JC, Alexander KP, et al. 2014
ACC/AHA/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS focused update of theguideline for the diagnosis and management of pa-tients with stable ischemic heart disease: a report ofthe American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines, and the
American Association for Thoracic Surgery, PreventiveCardiovascular Nurses Association, Society for Cardio-vascular Angiography and Interventions, and Societyof Thoracic Surgeons. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;64:
1929 –1949 .
87.Arnett DK, Blumenthal R, Albert M, et al. 2019
ACC/AHA guideline on the primary prevention of car-diovascular disease: a report of the American Collegeof Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Forceon Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol
.
2019;74:e177 –e232 .
88.Budoff MJ, Li D, Kazerooni EA, et al. Diagnostic
accuracy of noninvasive 64-row computed tomo-graphic coronary angiography (CCTA) compared withmyocardial perfusion imaging (MPI): the PICTUREstudy, a prospective multicenter trial. Acad Radiol .
2017;24:22 –29.
89.SCOT-HEART Investigators, Newby DE,
Adamson PD, et al. Coronary CT angiography and 5-year risk of myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med .
2018;379:924 –933.
90.Williams MC, Hunter A, Shah ASV, et al. Use of
coronary computed tomographic angiography to guide
management of patients with coronary disease. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2016;67:1759 –1768 .
91.Ladapo JA, Hoffmann U, Lee KL, et al. Changes in
medical therapy and lifestyle after anatomical orfunctional testing for coronary artery disease. JA m
Heart Assoc . 2016;5:e003807 .
92.Mark DB, Anstrom KJ, Sheng S, et al. Quality-of-
life outcomes with anatomic versus functional diag-nostic testing strategies in symptomatic patients withsuspected coronary artery disease: results from the
PROMISE randomized trial. Circulation . 2016;133:1995 –
2007 .
93.Adamson PD, Williams MC, Dweck MR, et al.
Guiding therapy by coronary CT angiography improvesoutcomes in patients with stable chest pain. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2019;74:2058 –2070 .
94.Hulten E, Bittencourt MS, Singh A, et al. Coronary
artery disease detected by coronary computed tomo-graphic angiography is associated with intensi ﬁcation
of preventive medical therapy and lower low-density
lipoprotein cholesterol. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging .
2014;7:629 –638.
95.Norgaard BL, Terkelsen CJ, Mathiassen ON, et al.
Coronary CT angiographic and ﬂow reserve-guided
management of patients with stable ischemic heartdisease. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2018;72:2123 –2134 .
96.Bittencourt MS, Hulten EA, Murthy VL, et al.
Clinical outcomes after evaluation of stable chest painby coronary computed tomographic angiography
versus usual care: a meta-analysis. Circ Cardiovasc
Imaging . 2016;9:e004419 .Gulati et al . JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
2021 Chest Pain Guideline NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285e266

97.McCully RB, Roger VL, Mahoney DW, et al.
Outcome after normal exercise echocardiography andpredictors of subsequent cardiac events: follow-up of1,325 patients. J Am Coll Cardiol . 1998;31:144 –149.
98.Metz LD, Beattie M, Hom R, et al. The prognostic
value of normal exercise myocardial perfusion imagingand exercise echocardiography: a meta-analysis. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2007;49:227 –237.
99.Smulders MW, Jaarsma C, Nelemans PJ, et al.
Comparison of the prognostic value of negative
non-invasive cardiac investigations in patients withsuspected or known coronary artery disease-a meta-analysis. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging . 2017;18:980 –
987.
100. Douglas PS, Hoffmann U, Patel MR, et al. Out-
comes of anatomical versus functional testing forcoronary artery disease. N Engl J Med . 2015;372:1291 –
1300 .
101. Shaw LJ, Hage FG, Berman DS, et al. Prognosis in
the era of comparative effectiveness research: where is
nuclear cardiology now and where should it be? J Nucl
Cardiol . 2012;19:1026 –1043 .
102. Green R, Cantoni V, Petretta M, et al. Negative
predictive value of stress myocardial perfusion imaging
and coronary computed tomography angiography: ameta-analysis. J Nucl Cardiol . 2018;25:1588 –1597 .
103. Bom MJ, van Diemen PA, Driessen RS, et al.
Prognostic value of [15O]H2O positron emissiontomography-derived global and regional myocardialperfusion. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging . 2020;21:
777–786.
104. Driessen RS, Danad I, Stuijfzand WJ, et al. Com-
parison of coronary computed tomography angiog-raphy, fractional ﬂow reserve, and perfusion imaging
for ischemia diagnosis. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;73:161 –
173.
105. Greenwood JP, Herzog BA, Brown JM, et al.
Prognostic value of cardiovascular magnetic resonanceand single-photon emission computed tomography insuspected coronary heart disease: long-term follow-up of a prospective, diagnostic accuracy cohort study.Ann Intern Med . 2016;165:1 –9.
106. Rabbat M, Leipsic J, Bax J, et al. Fractional ﬂow
reserve derived from coronary computed tomographyangiography safely defers invasive coronary angiog-
raphy in patients with stable coronary artery disease.
J Clin Med . 2020;9:604 .
107. Cami E, Tagami T, Raff G, et al. Importance of
measurement site on assessment of lesion-speci ﬁc
ischemia and diagnostic performance by coronarycomputed tomography angiography-derived fractionalﬂow reserve. J Cardiovasc Comput Tomogr . 2021;15:
114–120
.
108. Hochman JS, Reynolds HR, Bangalore S, et al.
Baseline characteristics and risk pro ﬁles of participants
in the ISCHEMIA randomized clinical trial. JAMA Car-
diol. 2019;4:273 –286.
109. Blankstein R, Di Carli MF. Integration of coronary
anatomy and myocardial perfusion imaging. Nat Rev
Cardiol . 2010;7:226 –236.
110. Berman DS, Wong ND, Gransar H, et al. Rela-
tionship between stress-induced myocardial ischemia
and atherosclerosis measured by coronary calciumtomography. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2004;44:923 –930.
111.Marcos-Garces V, Gavara J, Monmeneu JV, et al.
Vasodilator stress CMR and all-cause mortality instable ischemic heart disease: a large retrospective
registry. J Am Coll Cardiol Img . 2020;13:1674 –1686 .
112. Kwong RY, Ge Y, Steel K, et al. Cardiac magnetic
resonance stress perfusion imaging for evaluation of
patients with chest pain. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;74:
1741 –1755 .
113. Ahmad IG, Abdulla RK, Klem I, et al. Comparison
of stress cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging(CMR) with stress nuclear perfusion for the diagnosisof coronary artery disease. J Nucl Cardiol . 2016;23:
287–297.
5.2. Patients With Known CAD Presenting With
Stable Chest Pain
1.Boden WE, O ’Rourke RA, Teo KK, et al. Optimal
medical therapy with or without PCI for stable coro-nary disease. N Engl J Med . 2007;356:1503 –1516 .
2.BARI 2D Study Group, Frye RL, August P, et al.
A randomized trial of therapies for type 2 diabetes andcoronary artery disease. N Engl J Med . 2009;360:
2503 –2515 .
3.Maron DJ, Hochman JS, Reynolds HR, et al. Initial
invasive or conservative strategy for stable coronarydisease. N Engl J Med . 2020;382:1395 –1407 .
4.Arnett DK, Blumenthal R, Albert M, et al. 2019 ACC/
AHA guideline on the primary prevention of cardio-vascular disease: a report of the American College ofCardiology/American Heart Association Task Force onClinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;74:
e177 –232.
5.Grundy SM, Stone NJ, Bailey AL, et al. 2018
AHA/ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/ADA/AGS/APhA/
ASPC/NLA/PCNA guideline on the management ofblood cholesterol: a report of the American College ofCardiology/American Heart Association Task Force onClinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;73:
e285 –e350 .
6.Fihn SD, Blankenship JC, Alexander KP, et al. 2014
ACC/AHA/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS focused update of theguideline for the diagnosis and management of pa-tients with stable ischemic heart disease: a report ofthe American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines, and the
American Association for Thoracic Surgery, PreventiveCardiovascular Nurses Association, Society for Cardio-vascular Angiography and Interventions, and Societyof Thoracic Surgeons. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;64:
1929 –1949 .
7.Fihn SD, Gardin JM, Abrams J, et al. 2012 ACCF/
AHA/ACP/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS guideline for thediagnosis and management of patients with stable
ischemic heart disease: a report of the American Col-
lege of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Asso-ciation Task Force on Practice Guidelines, and theAmerican College of Physicians, American Associationfor Thoracic Surgery, Preventive Cardiovascular NursesAssociation, Society for Cardiovascular Angiographyand Interventions, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons.
J Am Coll Cardiol . 2012;60:e44 –e164 .
5.2.1. Patients With Obstructive CAD Who
Present With Stable Chest Pain
1.Boden WE, O ’Rourke RA, Teo KK, et al. Optimal
medical therapy with or without PCI for stable coro-nary disease. N Engl J Med . 2007;356:1503 –1516 .
2.BARI 2D Study Group, Frye RL, August P, et al.
A randomized trial of therapies for type 2 diabetes andcoronary artery disease. N Engl J Med . 2009;360:
2503 –2515 .
3.De Bruyne B, Pijls NH, Kalesan B, et al. Fractional
ﬂow reserve-guided PCI versus medical therapy in
stable coronary disease. N Engl J Med . 2012;367:991 –
1001 .
4.Maron DJ, Hochman JS, Reynolds HR, et al. Initial
invasive or conservative strategy for stable coronary
disease. N Engl J Med . 2020;382:1395 –1407 .
5.De Bruyne B, Fearon WF, Pijls NH, et al. Fractional
ﬂow reserve-guided PCI for stable coronary artery
disease. N Engl J Med . 2014;371:1208 –1217.
6.Tonino PA, De Bruyne B, Pijls NH, et al. Fractional
ﬂow reserve versus angiography for guiding percuta-
neous coronary intervention. N Engl J Med . 2009;360:
213–224.
7.Bhatt DL. Assessment of stable coronary lesions.
N Engl J Med . 2017;376:1879 –1881 .
8.Patel MR, Bailey SR, Bonow RO, et al. ACCF/SCAI/
AATS/AHA/ASE/ASNC/HFSA/HRS/SCCM/SCCT/SCMR/STS 2012 appropriate use criteria for diagnostic cath-eterization: a report of the American College of Car-diology Foundation Appropriate Use Criteria Task
Force, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and
Interventions, American Association for Thoracic Sur-
gery, American Heart Association, American Society ofEchocardiography, American Society of Nuclear Car-diology, Heart Failure Society of America, HeartRhythm Society, Society of Critical Care Medicine,Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography,
Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance, and
Society of Thoracic Surgeons. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2012;59:1995 –2027 .
9.Suh YJ, Hong YJ, Lee HJ, et al. Accuracy of CT for
selecting candidates for coronary artery bypass graftsurgery: combination with the SYNTAX score. Radi-
ology . 2015;276:390 –399.
10.Chan M, Ridley L, Dunn DJ, et al. A systematic
review and meta-analysis of multidetector computedtomography in the assessment of coronary artery
bypass grafts. Int J Cardiol . 2016;221:898 –905.
11.Small GR, Yam Y, Chen L, et al. Prognostic assess-
ment of coronary artery bypass patients with 64-slice
computed tomography angiography: anatomical in-formation is incremental to clinical risk prediction.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2011;58:2389 –2395 .
12.Andreini D, Modolo R, Katagiri Y, et al. Impact of
fractional ﬂow reserve derived from coronary
computed tomography angiography on heart teamtreatment decision-making in patients with multi-vessel coronary artery disease: insights from the
SYNTAX III REVOLUTION trial. Circ Cardiovasc Interv .
2019;12:e007607 .
13.Collet C, Onuma Y, Andreini D, et al. Coronary
computed tomography angiography for heart teamdecision-making in multivessel coronary artery dis-ease. Eur Heart J . 2018;39:3689 –3698 .
14.Shaw LJ, Berman DS, Maron DJ, et al. Optimal
medical therapy with or without percutaneous coro-nary intervention to reduce ischemic burden: resultsfrom the Clinical Outcomes Utilizing Revascularization
and Aggressive Drug Evaluation (COURAGE) trial nu-
clear substudy. Circulation . 2008;117:1283 –1291 .
15.Shaw LJ, Cerqueira MD, Brooks MM, et al. Impact
of left ventricular function and the extent of ischemiaand scar by stress myocardial perfusion imaging onJACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021 Gulati et al .
NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285 2021 Chest Pain Guidelinee267

prognosis and therapeutic risk reduction in diabetic
patients with coronary artery disease: results from theBypass Angioplasty Revascularization Investigation 2Diabetes (BARI 2D) trial. J Nucl Cardiol . 2012;19:658 –
669.
16.Zellweger MJ, Fahrni G, Ritter M, et al. Prognostic
value of "routine" cardiac stress imaging 5 years after
percutaneous coronary intervention: the prospectivelong-term observational BASKET (Basel Stent Koste-neffektivitats Trial) LATE IMAGING study. J Am Coll
Cardiol Intv . 2014;7:615 –621.
17.Zellweger MJ, Kaiser C, Jeger R, et al. Coronary
artery disease progression late after successful stentimplantation. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2012;59:793 –799.
18.Zellweger MJ, Kaiser C, Brunner-La Rocca HP, et al.
Value and limitations of target-vessel ischemia inpredicting late clinical events after drug-eluting stent
implantation. J Nucl Med . 2008;49:550 –556.
19.Shaw LJ, Weintraub WS, Maron DJ, et al. Baseline
stress myocardial perfusion imaging results and out-
comes in patients with stable ischemic heart diseaserandomized to optimal medical therapy with orwithout percutaneous coronary intervention. Am Heart
J. 2012;164:243 –250.
20.Patel KK, Spertus JA, Arnold SV, et al. Ischemia on
PET MPI may identify patients with improvement inangina and health status post-revascularization. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2019;74:1734 –1736 .
21.Patel KK, Spertus JA, Chan PS, et al. Extent of
myocardial ischemia on positron emission tomography
and survival bene ﬁt with early revascularization. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2019;74:1645 –1654 .
22.Reynolds HR, Shaw LJ, Min JK, et al. Association of
sex with severity of coronary artery disease, ischemia,and symptom burden in patients with moderate orsevere ischemia: secondary analysis of the ISCHEMIArandomized clinical trial. JAMA Cardiol . 2020;5:1 –14.
23.Schwitter J, Wacker CM, van Rossum AC, et al. MR-
IMPACT: comparison of perfusion-cardiac magneticresonance with single-photon emission computed to-
mography for the detection of coronary artery disease
in a multicentre, multivendor, randomized trial. Eur
Heart J . 2008;29:480 –489.
24.Schwitter J, Wacker CM, Wilke N, et al. MR-
IMPACT II: Magnetic resonance imaging for myocardialperfusion assessment in coronary artery disease trial:perfusion-cardiac magnetic resonance vs. single-photon emission computed tomography for thedetection of coronary artery disease: a comparative
multicentre, multivendor trial. Eur Heart J . 2013;34:
775–781.
25.Arai AE, Schulz-Menger J, Berman D, et al. Gado-
butrol-enhanced cardiac magnetic resonance imagingfor detection of coronary artery disease. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2020;76:1536 –
1547 .
26.Takx RA, Blomberg BA, El Aidi H, et al. Diagnostic
accuracy of stress myocardial perfusion imagingcompared to invasive coronary angiography withfractional ﬂow reserve meta-analysis. Circ Cardiovasc
Imaging . 2015;8 .
27.Heitner JF, Kim RJ, Kim HW, et al. Prognostic value
of vasodilator stress cardiac magnetic resonance im-
aging: a multicenter study with 48000 patient-yearsof follow-up. JAMA Cardiol . 2019;4:256 –264.
28.Kato S, Saito N, Nakachi T, et al. Stress perfusion
coronary ﬂow reserve versus cardiac magneticresonance for known or suspected CAD. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2017;70:869 –879.
29.Vincenti G, Masci PG, Monney P, et al. Stress
perfusion CMR in patients with known and suspectedCAD: prognostic value and optimal ischemic thresholdfor revascularization. J Am Coll Cardiol Img . 2017;10:
526–537.
30.Kwong RY, Ge Y, Steel K, et al. Cardiac magnetic
resonance stress perfusion imaging for evaluation ofpatients with chest pain. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;74:
1741 –1755 .
31.Taqueti VR, Hachamovitch R, Murthy VL, et al.
Global coronary ﬂow reserve is associated with
adverse cardiovascular events independently ofluminal angiographic severity and modi ﬁes the effect
of early revascularization. Circulation . 2015;131:19 –27.
32.Driessen RS, Danad I, Stuijfzand WJ, et al. Com-
parison of coronary computed tomography angiog-raphy, fractional ﬂow reserve, and perfusion imaging
for ischemia diagnosis. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;73:161 –
173.
33.Danad I, Raijmakers PG, Driessen RS, et al. Com-
parison of coronary CT angiography, SPECT, PET, andhybrid imaging for diagnosis of ischemic heart diseasedetermined by fractional ﬂow reserve. JAMA Cardiol .
2017;2:1100 –1107 .
34.Patel KK, Spertus JA, Chan PS, et al. Myocardial
blood ﬂow reserve assessed by positron emission to-
mography myocardial perfusion imaging identi ﬁes
patients with a survival bene ﬁt from early revascular-
ization. Eur Heart J . 2020;41:759 –
768.
35.Bom MJ, van Diemen PA, Driessen RS, et al.
Prognostic value of [15O]H2O positron emission
tomography-derived global and regional myocardial
perfusion. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging . 2020;21:
777–786.
36.Knott KD, Seraphim A, Augusto JB, et al. The
prognostic signi ﬁcance of quantitative myocardial
perfusion: an arti ﬁcial intelligence-based approach
using perfusion mapping. Circulation . 2020;141:1282 –
1291 .
37.Patel KK, Al Badarin F, Chan PS, et al. Randomized
comparison of clinical effectiveness of pharmacologic
SPECT and PET MPI in symptomatic CAD patients. JA m
Coll Cardiol Img . 2019;12:1821 –1831.
38.Ho PM, Rumsfeld JS, Peterson PN, et al. Chest pain
on exercise treadmill test predicts future cardiac hos-pitalizations. Clin Cardiol . 2007;30:505 –510.
39.Hambrecht R, Walther C, Mobius-Winkler S, et al.
Percutaneous coronary angioplasty compared withexercise training in patients with stable coronary arterydisease: a randomized trial. Circulation . 2004;109:
1371 –1378 .
40.Jaureguizar KV, Vicente-Campos D, Bautista LR,
et al. Effect of high-intensity interval versus contin-
uous exercise training on functional capacity andquality of life in patients with coronary artery disease:a randomized clinical trial. J Cardiopulm Rehabil Prev .
2016;36:96 –105.
41.Spertus JA, Jones PG, Maron DJ, et al. Health
status after invasive or conservative care in coronaryand advanced kidney disease. N Engl J Med . 2020;382:
1619 –1628 .
42.Xaplanteris P, Fournier S, Pijls NHJ, et al. Five-year
outcomes with PCI guided by fractional ﬂow reserve.
N Engl J Med . 2018;379:250 –259.43.Lee S-E, Sung JM, Andreini D, et al. Differences in
progression to obstructive lesions per high-risk plaquefeatures and plaque volumes with CCTA. J Am Coll
Cardiol Img . 2019;13:1409 –1417.
44.Lee SE, Chang HJ, Sung JM, et al. Effects of statins
on coronary atherosclerotic plaques: the PARADIGMstudy. J Am Coll Cardiol Img . 2018;11:1475 –1484 .
45.
Williams MC, Hunter A, Shah ASV, et al. Use of
coronary computed tomographic angiography to guidemanagement of patients with coronary disease. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2016;67:1759 –1768 .
46.Ladapo JA, Hoffmann U, Lee KL, et al. Changes in
medical therapy and lifestyle after anatomical orfunctional testing for coronary artery disease. JA m
Heart Assoc . 2016;5:e003807 .
47.Mark DB, Anstrom KJ, Sheng S, et al. Quality-of-
life outcomes with anatomic versus functional diag-nostic testing strategies in symptomatic patients withsuspected coronary artery disease: results from the
PROMISE randomized trial. Circulation . 2016;133:1995 –
2007 .
48.Sharma A, Coles A, Sekaran NK, et al. Stress
testing versus CT angiography in patients with dia-betes and suspected coronary artery disease. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2019;73:893 –902.
49.SCOT-HEART Investigators. Coronary CT angiog-
raphy and 5-year risk of myocardial infarction. N Engl J
Med. 2018;379:924 –933.
50.Adamson PD, Williams MC, Dweck MR, et al.
Guiding therapy by coronary CT angiography improves
outcomes in patients with stable chest pain. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2019;74:2058 –2070 .
51.Budoff MJ, Dowe D, Jollis JG, et al. Diagnostic
performance of 64-multidetector row coronary
computed tomographic angiography for evaluation of
coronary artery stenosis in individuals without knowncoronary artery disease: results from the prospectivemulticenter ACCURACY (Assessment by CoronaryComputed Tomographic Angiography of IndividualsUndergoing Invasive Coronary Angiography) trial. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2008;52:1724 –1732 .
52.Meijboom WB, Meijs MF, Schuijf JD, et al. Diag-
nostic accuracy of 64-slice computed tomographycoronary angiography: a prospective, multicenter,
multivendor study. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2008;52:2135 –
2144 .
53.Miller JM, Rochitte CE, Dewey M, et al. Diagnostic
performance of coronary angiography by 64-row CT.N Engl J Med . 2008;359:2324 –2336 .
54.Neglia D, Rovai D, Caselli C, et al. Detection of
signiﬁcant coronary artery disease by noninvasive
anatomical and functional imaging. Circ Cardiovasc
Imaging . 2015;8:e002179 .
55.Budoff MJ, Li D, Kazerooni EA, et al. Diagnostic
accuracy of noninvasive 64-row computed tomo-graphic coronary angiography (CCTA) compared with
myocardial perfusion imaging (MPI): the PICTURE
study, a prospective multicenter trial. Acad Radiol .
2017;24:22 –29.
56.
Xie JX, Eshtehardi P, Varghese T, et al. Prognostic
signiﬁcance of nonobstructive left main coronary ar-
tery disease in women versus men: long-term out-comes from the CONFIRM (Coronary CT AngiographyEvaluation For Clinical Outcomes: An International
Multicenter). Registry. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging .
2017;10:e006246 .Gulati et al . JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
2021 Chest Pain Guideline NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285e268

57.Min JK, Dunning A, Lin FY, et al. Age- and sex-
related differences in all-cause mortality risk basedon coronary computed tomography angiography ﬁnd-
ings results from the International Multicenter
CONFIRM (Coronary CT Angiography Evaluation for
Clinical Outcomes: An International Multicenter Reg-istry) of 23,854 patients without known coronary ar-tery disease. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2011;58:849 –860.
58.Fihn SD, Blankenship JC, Alexander KP, et al. 2014
ACC/AHA/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS focused update of the
guideline for the diagnosis and management of pa-
tients with stable ischemic heart disease: a report ofthe American College of Cardiology/American HeartAssociation Task Force on Practice Guidelines, and theAmerican Association for Thoracic Surgery, PreventiveCardiovascular Nurses Association, Society for Cardio-vascular Angiography and Interventions, and Society
of Thoracic Surgeons. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;64:
1929 –1949 .
59.Norgaard BL, Leipsic J, Gaur S, et al. Diagnostic
performance of noninvasive fractional ﬂow reserve
derived from coronary computed tomography angi-ography in suspected coronary artery disease: the NXT
trial (Analysis of Coronary Blood Flow Using CT Angi-
ography: Next Steps). J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;63:1145 –
1155.
60.Min JK, Leipsic J, Pencina MJ, et al. Diagnostic
accuracy of fractional ﬂow reserve from anatomic CT
angiography. JAMA . 2012;308:1237 –1245 .
61.Douglas PS, Pontone G, Hlatky MA, et al. Clinical
outcomes of fractional ﬂow reserve by computed
tomographic angiography-guided diagnostic strategiesvs. usual care in patients with suspected coronary ar-tery disease: the prospective longitudinal trial ofFFR(CT): outcome and resource impacts study. Eur
Heart J . 2015;36:3359 –3367 .
62.Patel MR, Norgaard BL, Fairbairn TA, et al. 1-Year
impact on medical practice and clinical outcomes ofFFRCT: the ADVANCE registry. J Am Coll Cardiol Img .
2019;13:97 –105.
63.Hachamovitch R, Rozanski A, Hayes SW, et al.
Predicting therapeutic bene ﬁt from myocardial revas-
cularization procedures: are measurements of bothresting left ventricular ejection fraction and stress-induced myocardial ischemia necessary? J Nucl Car-
diol. 2006;13:768 –778.
64.Hachamovitch R, Hayes SW, Friedman JD, et al.
Comparison of the short-term survival bene ﬁt associ-
ated with revascularization compared with medicaltherapy in patients with no prior coronary artery dis-ease undergoing stress myocardial perfusion singlephoton emission computed tomography. Circulation .
2003;107:2900 –2907 .
65.Hachamovitch R, Rozanski A, Shaw LJ, et al.
Impact of ischaemia and scar on the therapeuticbeneﬁt derived from myocardial revascularization vs.
medical therapy among patients undergoing stress-rest myocardial perfusion scintigraphy. Eur Heart J
.
2011;32:1012 –1024 .
66.Shaw LJ, Vasey C, Sawada S, et al. Impact of
gender on risk strati ﬁcation by exercise and dobut-
amine stress echocardiography: long-term mortality in4234 women and 6898 men. Eur Heart J . 2005;26:
447–456.
67.Yao SS, Bangalore S, Chaudhry FA. Prognostic
implications of stress echocardiography and impact on
patient outcomes: an effective gatekeeper forcoronary angiography and revascularization. Am Soc
Echocardiogr . 2010;23:832 –839.
68.Al-Lamee R, Thompson D, Dehbi HM, et al.
Percutaneous coronary intervention in stable angina
(ORBITA): a double-blind, randomised controlled trial.Lancet . 2018;391:31 –40.
69.Al-Lamee RK, Shun-Shin MJ, Howard JP, et al.
Dobutamine stress echocardiography ischemia as a
predictor of the placebo-controlled ef ﬁcacy of percu-
taneous coronary intervention in stable coronary ar-tery disease: the stress echocardiography-strati ﬁed
analysis of ORBITA. Circulation . 2019;140:1971 –1980 .
70.Taqueti VR, Shaw LJ, Cook NR, et al. Excess car-
diovascular risk in women relative to men referred forcoronary angiography is associated with severelyimpaired coronary ﬂow reserve, not obstructive dis-
ease. Circulation . 2017;135:566 –577.
71.Taqueti VR, Solomon SD, Shah AM, et al. Coronary
microvascular dysfunction and future risk of heartfailure with preserved ejection fraction. Eur Heart J .
2018;39:840 –849.
5.2.1.1. Patients With Prior Coronary Artery
Bypass With Stable Chest Pain
1.Fihn SD, Blankenship JC, Alexander KP, et al. 2014
ACC/AHA/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS focused update of theguideline for the diagnosis and management of pa-tients with stable ischemic heart disease: a report of
the American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines, and theAmerican Association for Thoracic Surgery, PreventiveCardiovascular Nurses Association, Society for Cardio-vascular Angiography and Interventions, and Societyof Thoracic Surgeons. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;64:
1929 –1949 .
2.Hammermeister KE, DeRouen TA, Dodge HT. Vari-
ables predictive of survival in patients with coronarydisease. Selection by univariate and multivariate ana-lyses from the clinical, electrocardiographic, exercise,arteriographic, and quantitative angiographic evalua-
tions. Circulation . 1979;59:421 –430.
3.Mark DB, Hlatky MA, Harrell FE Jr, et al. Exercise
treadmill score for predicting prognosis in coronaryartery disease. Ann Intern Med . 1987;106:793 –800.
4.Levine GN, Bates ER, Blankenship JC, et al. 2011
ACCF/AHA/SCAI guideline for percutaneous coronaryintervention: a report of the American College ofCardiology Foundation/American Heart AssociationTask Force on Practice Guidelines and the Society for
Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2011;58:e44 –122.
5.Hillis LD, Smith PK, Anderson JL, et al. 2011 ACCF/
AHA guideline for coronary artery bypass graft sur-gery: a report of the American College of Cardiology
Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on
Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2011;58:e-123 –
e-210 .
6.Patel MR, Bailey SR, Bonow RO, et al. ACCF/SCAI/
AATS/AHA/ASE/ASNC/HFSA/HRS/SCCM/SCCT/SCMR/
STS 2012 appropriate use criteria for diagnostic
catheterization: a report of the American College ofCardiology Foundation Appropriate Use Criteria TaskForce, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography andInterventions, American Association for ThoracicSurgery, American Heart Association, American Soci-ety of Echocardiography, American Society of Nuclear
Cardiology, Heart Failure Society of America, Heart
Rhythm Society, Society of Critical Care Medicine,Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography,
Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance, andSociety of Thoracic Surgeons. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2012;59:1995 –2027 .
7.Bittl JA, He Y, Jacobs AK, et al. Bayesian methods
afﬁrm the use of percutaneous coronary intervention
to improve survival in patients with unprotected leftmain coronary artery disease. Circulation . 2013;127:
2177 –2185 .
8.Fitzgibbon GM, Kafka HP, Leach AJ, et al. Coronary
bypass graft fate and patient outcome: angiographicfollow-up of 5,065 grafts related to survival andreoperation in 1,388 patients during 25 years. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 1996;28:616 –626.
9.Harskamp RE, Lopes RD, Baisden CE, et al. Saphe-
nous vein graft failure after coronary artery bypasssurgery: pathophysiology, management, and futuredirections. Ann Surg . 2013;257:824 –833.
10.Wolk MJ, Bailey SR, Doherty JU, et al. ACCF/AHA/
ASE/ASNC/HFSA/HRS/SCAI/SCCT/SCMR/STS 2013
multimodality appropriate use criteria for the detec-
tion and risk assessment of stable ischemic heart dis-ease: a report of the American College of CardiologyFoundation Appropriate Use Criteria Task Force,American Heart Association, American Society ofEchocardiography, American Society of Nuclear Car-
diology, Heart Failure Society of America, Heart
Rhythm Society, Society for Cardiovascular Angiog-raphy and Interventions, Society of CardiovascularComputed Tomography, Society for CardiovascularMagnetic Resonance, and Society of Thoracic Sur-geons. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;63:380 –406.
11.Taylor AJ, Cerqueira M, Hodgson JM, et al. ACCF/
SCCT/ACR/AHA/ASE/ASNC/NASCI/SCAI/SCMR 2010appropriate use criteria for cardiac computed tomog-raphy: a report of the American College of CardiologyFoundation Appropriate Use Criteria Task Force, theSociety of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography, the
American College of Radiology, the American Heart
Association, the American Society of Echocardiogra-phy, the American Society of Nuclear Cardiology, theNorth American Society for Cardiovascular Imaging,the Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and In-terventions, and the Society for Cardiovascular Mag-netic Resonance. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2010;56:1864 –
1894 .
12.Sabik JF 3rd. Understanding saphenous vein graft
patency. Circulation . 2011;124:273 –275.
13.Taggart DP. Current status of arterial grafts for
coronary artery bypass grafting. Ann Cardiothorac
Surg. 2013;2:427 –
430.
14.Gaudino M, Benedetto U, Fremes S, et al. Radial-
artery or saphenous-vein grafts in coronary-arterybypass surgery. N Engl J Med . 2018;378:2069 –2077 .
15.Barbero U, Iannaccone M, d ’Ascenzo F, et al. 64
slice-coronary computed tomography sensitivity andspeciﬁcity in the evaluation of coronary artery bypass
graft stenosis: a meta-analysis. Int J Cardiol . 2016;216:
52–57.
5.2.2. Patients With Known Nonobstructive CAD
Presenting With Stable Chest Pain
1.Lee SE, Chang HJ, Sung JM, et al. Effects of statins
on coronary atherosclerotic plaques: the PARADIGMstudy. J Am Coll Cardiol Img . 2018;11:1475 –1484 .
2.Lee SE, Sung JM, Rizvi A, et al. Quanti ﬁcation of
coronary atherosclerosis in the assessment of coronaryJACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021 Gulati et al .
NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285 2021 Chest Pain Guidelinee269

artery disease. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging . 2018;11:
e007562 .
3.Hoffmann U, Ferencik M, Udelson JE, et al. Prog-
nostic value of noninvasive cardiovascular testing inpatients with stable chest pain: insights from thePROMISE trial (Prospective Multicenter Imaging Study
for Evaluation of Chest Pain). Circulation . 2017;135:
2320 –2332 .
4.Williams MC, Kwiecinski J, Doris M, et al. Low-
attenuation noncalci ﬁed plaque on coronary computed
tomography angiography predicts myocardial infarc-tion: results from the Multicenter SCOT-HEART Trial(Scottish Computed Tomography of the HEART). Cir-
culation . 2020;141:1452 –1462 .
5.Ferencik M, Mayrhofer T, Bittner DO, et al. Use of
high-risk coronary atherosclerotic plaque detection forrisk strati ﬁcation of patients with stable chest pain: a
secondary analysis of the PROMISE randomized clinical
trial. JAMA Cardiol . 2018;3:144 –152.
6.Chang HJ, Lin FY, Lee SE, et al. Coronary athero-
sclerotic precursors of acute coronary syndromes. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2018;71:2511 –2522 .
7.Motoyama S, Ito H, Sarai M, et al. Plaque charac-
terization by coronary computed tomography angiog-raphy and the likelihood of acute coronary events inmid-term follow-up. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2015;66:337 –
346.
8.Douglas PS, Pontone G, Hlatky MA, et al. Clinical
outcomes of fractional ﬂow reserve by computed
tomographic angiography-guided diagnostic strategies
vs. usual care in patients with suspected coronary ar-
tery disease: the prospective longitudinal trial ofFFR(CT): outcome and resource impacts study. Eur
Heart J . 2015;36:3359 –3367 .
9.Douglas PS, De Bruyne B, Pontone G, et al. 1-year
outcomes of FFRCT-guided care in patients with sus-pected coronary disease: the PLATFORM Study. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2016;68:435 –445.
10.Fairbairn TA, Nieman K, Akasaka T, et al. Real-world
clinical utility and impact on clinical decision-making of
coronary computed tomography angiography-derived
fractional ﬂow reserve: lessons from the ADVANCE
Registry. Eur Heart J . 2018;39:3701 –3711.
11.Patel MR, Norgaard BL, Fairbairn TA, et al. 1-Year
impact on medical practice and clinical outcomes ofFFRCT: the ADVANCE registry. J Am Coll Cardiol Img .
2019;13:97 –105.
12.Min JK, Leipsic J, Pencina MJ, et al. Diagnostic
accuracy of fractional ﬂow reserve from anatomic CT
angiography. JAMA . 2012;308:1237 –1245 .
13.Norgaard BL, Leipsic J, Gaur S, et al. Diagnostic
performance of noninvasive fractional ﬂow reserve
derived from coronary computed tomography angi-
ography in suspected coronary artery disease: the NXT
trial (Analysis of Coronary Blood Flow Using CT Angi-ography: Next Steps). J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;63:1145 –
1155.
14.Andreini D, Modolo R, Katagiri Y, et al. Impact of
fractional ﬂow reserve derived from coronary
computed tomography angiography on heart teamtreatment decision-making in patients with multi-
vessel coronary artery disease: insights from the
SYNTAX III REVOLUTION trial. Circ Cardiovasc Interv .
2019;12:e007607 .
15.Taqueti VR, Solomon SD, Shah AM, et al. Coronary
microvascular dysfunction and future risk of heartfailure with preserved ejection fraction. Eur Heart J .
2018;39:840 –849.
16.Taqueti VR, Shaw LJ, Cook NR, et al. Excess car-
diovascular risk in women relative to men referred forcoronary angiography is associated with severelyimpaired coronary ﬂow reserve, not obstructive dis-
ease. Circulation . 2017;135:566 –577.
17.Taqueti VR, Hachamovitch R, Murthy VL, et al.
Global coronary ﬂow reserve is associated with
adverse cardiovascular events independently ofluminal angiographic severity and modi ﬁes the effect
of early revascularization. Circulation . 2015;131:19 –27.
18.Driessen RS, Danad I, Stuijfzand WJ, et al. Com-
parison of coronary computed tomography angiog-raphy, fractional ﬂow reserve, and perfusion imaging
for ischemia diagnosis. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;73:161 –
173.
19.Danad I, Raijmakers PG, Driessen RS, et al. Com-
parison of coronary CT angiography, SPECT, PET, andhybrid imaging for diagnosis of ischemic heart disease
determined by fractional ﬂow reserve. JAMA Cardiol .
2017;2:1100 –1107 .
20.Patel KK, Spertus JA, Chan PS, et al. Myocardial
blood ﬂow reserve assessed by positron emission to-
mography myocardial perfusion imaging identi ﬁ
es
patients with a survival bene ﬁt from early revascular-
ization. Eur Heart J . 2020;41:759 –768.
21.Bom MJ, van Diemen PA, Driessen RS, et al.
Prognostic value of [15O]H2O positron emission
tomography-derived global and regional myocardialperfusion. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging . 2020;21:
777–786.
22.Kato S, Saito N, Nakachi T, et al. Stress perfusion
coronary ﬂow reserve versus cardiac magnetic reso-
nance for known or suspected CAD. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2017;70:869 –879.
23.Indorkar R, Kwong RY, Romano S, et al. Global
coronary ﬂow reserve measured during stress cardiac
magnetic resonance imaging Is an independent pre-dictor of adverse cardiovascular events. J Am Coll
Cardiol Img . 2019;12:1686 –1695 .
24.Zorach B, Shaw PW, Bourque J, et al. Quantitative
cardiovascular magnetic resonance perfusion imagingidenti ﬁes reduced ﬂow reserve in microvascular coro-
nary artery disease. J Cardiovasc Magn Reson . 2018;20:
14.
25.Puchner SB, Liu T, Mayrhofer T, et al. High-risk
plaque detected on coronary CT angiography predictsacute coronary syndromes independent of signi ﬁcant
stenosis in acute chest pain: results from the
ROMICAT-II trial. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;64:684 –692.
26.Fihn SD, Gardin JM, Abrams J, et al. 2012 ACCF/
AHA/ACP/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS guideline for thediagnosis and management of patients with stable
ischemic heart disease: a report of the American Col-
lege of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Asso-ciation Task Force on Practice Guidelines, and theAmerican College of Physicians, American Associationfor Thoracic Surgery, Preventive Cardiovascular NursesAssociation, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography
and Interventions, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons.
J Am Coll Cardiol . 2012;60:e44 –164.
27.Grundy SM, Stone NJ, Bailey AL, et al. 2018
AHA/ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/ADA/AGS/APhA/
ASPC/NLA/PCNA guideline on the management of
blood cholesterol: a report of the American College ofCardiology/American Heart Association Task Force onClinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;73:
e285 –e350 .
28.Fihn SD, Blankenship JC, Alexander KP, et al. 2014
ACC/AHA/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS focused update of theguideline for the diagnosis and management of pa-tients with stable ischemic heart disease: a report ofthe American College of Cardiology/American HeartAssociation Task Force on Practice Guidelines, and theAmerican Association for Thoracic Surgery, Preventive
Cardiovascular Nurses Association, Society for Cardio-
vascular Angiography and Interventions, and Societyof Thoracic Surgeons. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;64:
1929 –1949
.
29.Arnett DK, Blumenthal R, Albert M, et al. 2019
ACC/AHA guideline on the primary prevention of car-diovascular disease: a report of the American Collegeof Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Forceon Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2019;74:e177 –e232 .
30.Motoyama S, Sarai M, Harigaya H, et al. Computed
tomographic angiography characteristics of athero-sclerotic plaques subsequently resulting in acute cor-onary syndrome. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2009;54:49 –57.
31.Stuijfzand WJ, van Rosendael AR, Lin FY, et al.
Stress myocardial perfusion imaging vs coronarycomputed tomographic angiography for diagnosis ofinvasive vessel-speci ﬁc coronary physiology: predic-
tive modeling results from the computed tomographic
evaluation of atherosclerotic determinants of
myocardial ischemia (CREDENCE) Trial. JAMA Cardiol .
2020;5:1338 –1348 .
5.2.3. Patients With Suspected Ischemia and No
Obstructive CAD (INOCA)
1.Bairey Merz CN, Pepine CJ, Walsh MN, et al.
Ischemia and no obstructive coronary artery disease
(INOCA): developing evidence-based therapies and
research agenda for the next decade. Circulation .
2017;135:1075 –1092 .
2.AlBadri A, Bairy Merz CN, Johnson BD, et al. Impact
of abnormal coronary reactivity on long-term clinical
outcomes in women. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;73:684 –
693.
3.AlBadri A, Sharif B, Wei J, et al. Intracoronary bolus
injection versus intravenous infusion of adenosine for
assessment of coronary ﬂow velocity reserve in
women with signs and symptoms of myocardialischemia and no obstructive coronary artery disease. J
Am Coll Cardiol Intv . 2018;11:2125 –2127 .
4.Ford TJ, Stanley B, Sidik N, et al. 1-Year outcomes of
angina management guided by invasive coronaryfunction testing (CorMicA). J Am Coll Cardiol Intv .
2020;13:33 –45.
5.Taqueti VR, Solomon SD, Shah AM, et al. Coronary
microvascular dysfunction and future risk of heart
failure with preserved ejection fraction. Eur Heart J .
2018;39:840 –849.
6.Taqueti VR, Shaw LJ, Cook NR, et al. Excess car-
diovascular risk in women relative to men referred for
coronary angiography is associated with severelyimpaired coronary ﬂow reserve, not obstructive dis-
ease. Circulation . 2017;135:566 –577.
7.Taqueti VR, Hachamovitch R, Murthy VL, et al.
Global coronary
ﬂow reserve is associated with
adverse cardiovascular events independently ofGulati et al . JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
2021 Chest Pain Guideline NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285e270

luminal angiographic severity and modi ﬁes the effect
of early revascularization. Circulation . 2015;131:19 –27.
8.Driessen RS, Danad I, Stuijfzand WJ, et al. Com-
parison of coronary computed tomography angiog-raphy, fractional ﬂow reserve, and perfusion imaging
for ischemia diagnosis. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;73:161 –
173.
9.Danad I, Raijmakers PG, Driessen RS, et al. Com-
parison of coronary CT angiography, SPECT, PET, and
hybrid imaging for diagnosis of ischemic heart disease
determined by fractional ﬂow reserve. JAMA Cardiol .
2017;2:1100 –1107 .
10.Patel KK, Spertus JA, Chan PS, et al. Myocardial
blood ﬂow reserve assessed by positron emission to-
mography myocardial perfusion imaging identi ﬁes
patients with a survival bene ﬁt from early revascular-
ization. Eur Heart J . 2020;41:759 –768.
11.Bom MJ, van Diemen PA, Driessen RS, et al. Prog-
nostic value of [15O]H2O positron emissiontomography-derived global and regional myocardial
perfusion. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging . 2020;21:
777–786.
12.Kato S, Saito N, Nakachi T, et al. Stress perfusion
coronary ﬂow reserve versus cardiac magnetic reso-
nance for known or suspected CAD. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2017;70:869 –879.
13.Indorkar R, Kwong RY, Romano S, et al. Global
coronary ﬂow reserve measured during stress cardiac
magnetic resonance imaging Is an independent pre-dictor of adverse cardiovascular events. J Am Coll
Cardiol Img . 2019;12:1686 –1695 .
14.Zorach B, Shaw PW, Bourque J, et al. Quantitative
cardiovascular magnetic resonance perfusion imagingidenti ﬁes reduced ﬂow reserve in microvascular coronary
artery disease. J Cardiovasc Magn Reson . 2018;20:14 .
15.Pepine CJ, Ferdinand KC, Shaw LJ, et al. Emergence
of nonobstructive coronary artery disease: a woman ’s
problem and need for change in de
ﬁnition on angi-
ography. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2015;66:1918 –1933 .
16.Ford TJ, Corcoran D, Sidik N, et al. Coronary
microvascular dysfunction: assessment of both struc-ture and function. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2018;72:584 –586.
17.Gupta A, Taqueti VR, van de Hoef TP, et al. Inte-
grated noninvasive physiological assessment of coro-nary circulatory function and impact on cardiovascularmortality in patients with stable coronary artery dis-ease. Circulation . 2017;136:2325 –2336 .
18.Murthy VL, Bateman TM, Beanlands RS, et al.
Clinical quanti ﬁcation of myocardial blood ﬂow using
PET: joint position paper of the SNMMI cardiovascular
council and the ASNC. J Nucl Cardiol . 2018;25:269 –
297.
19.Kotecha T, Martinez-Naharro A, Boldrini M, et al.
Automated pixel-wise quantitative myocardial perfu-sion mapping by CMR to detect obstructive coronaryartery disease and coronary microvascular dysfunction:validation against invasive coronary physiology. JA m
Coll Cardiol Img . 2019;12:1958 –1969 .
20.Engblom H, Xue H, Akil S, et al. Fully quantitative
cardiovascular magnetic resonance myocardial perfu-sion ready for clinical use: a comparison between
cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging and posi-
tron emission tomography. J Cardiovasc Magn Reson .
2017;19:78 .
21.Sicari R, Rigo F, Cortigiani L, et al. Additive
prognostic value of coronary ﬂow reserve inpatients with chest pain syndrome and normal or
near-normal coronary arteries. Am J Cardiol .
2009;103:626 –631.
5.3. Cost-Value Considerations in Diagnostic
Testing
5.3.1. CCTA and CAC Scanning Cost-Value
Considerations
1.Mark DB, Federspiel JJ, Cowper PA, et al. Economic
outcomes with anatomical versus functional diagnostictesting for coronary artery disease. Ann Intern Med .
2016;165:94 –102.
2.Lubbers M, Dedic A, Coenen A, et al. Calcium im-
aging and selective computed tomography angiog-raphy in comparison to functional testing for
suspected coronary artery disease: the multicentre,
randomized CRESCENT trial. Eur Heart J . 2016;37:
1232 –1243 .
3.Chang HJ, Lin FY, Gebow D, et al. Selective referral
using CCTA versus direct referral for individualsreferred to invasive coronary angiography for sus-pected CAD: a randomized, controlled, open-labeltrial. J Am Coll Cardiol Img . 2019;12:1303 –1312.
4.Lubbers M, Coenen A, Kof ﬂard M, et al. Compre-
hensive cardiac CT with myocardial perfusion imagingversus functional testing in suspected coronary arterydisease: the multicenter randomized CRESCENT-II
trial. J Am Coll Cardiol Img . 2018;11:1625 –1636 .
5.3.2. Exercise Electrocardiographic Cost-Value
Considerations
1.Gurunathan S, Zacharias K, Akhtar M, et al. Cost-
effectiveness of a management strategy based onexercise echocardiography versus exercise electrocar-diography in patients presenting with suspectedangina during long term follow up: a randomizedstudy. Int J Cardiol . 2018;259:1 –7.
2.Genders TS, Petersen SE, Pugliese F, et al. The
optimal imaging strategy for patients with stable chestpain: a cost-effectiveness analysis. Ann Intern Med .
2015;162:474 –484.
3.Shreibati JB, Baker LC, Hlatky MA. Association of
coronary CT angiography or stress testing with sub-
sequent utilization and spending among Medicare
beneﬁciaries. JAMA . 2011;306:2128 –2136 .
4.Mark DB, Federspiel JJ, Cowper PA, et al. Economic
outcomes with anatomical versus functional diagnostic
testing for coronary artery disease. Ann Intern Med .
2016;165:94 –102.
5.Douglas PS, Hoffmann U, Patel MR, et al. Outcomes
of anatomical versus functional testing for coronaryartery disease. N Engl J Med . 2015;372:1291 –1300 .
6.Shaw LJ, Mieres JH, Hendel RH, et al. Comparative
effectiveness of exercise electrocardiography with orwithout myocardial perfusion single photon emissioncomputed tomography in women with suspected cor-onary artery disease: results from the What Is theOptimal Method for Ischemia Evaluation in Women(WOMEN) trial. Circulation . 2011;124:1239 –1249 .
5.3.3. Stress Echocardiographic Cost-Value
Considerations
1.Marwick TH, Shaw L, Case C, et al. Clinical and
economic impact of exercise electrocardiography andexercise echocardiography in clinical practice. Eur
Heart J . 2003;24:1153 –1163.
2.Kuntz KM, Fleischmann KE, Hunink MG, et al. Cost-
effectiveness of diagnostic strategies for patients withchest pain. Ann Intern Med . 1999;130:709 –718.
3.Genders TS, Petersen SE, Pugliese F, et al. The
optimal imaging strategy for patients with stable chestpain: a cost-effectiveness analysis. Ann Intern Med .
2015;162:474 –484.
4.Kim C, Kwok YS, Saha S, et al. Diagnosis of suspected
coronary artery disease in women: a cost-effectiveness
analysis.
Am Heart J . 1999;137:1019 –1027 .
5.van Waardhuizen CN, Khanji MY, Genders TSS, et al.
Comparative cost-effectiveness of non-invasive imag-
ing tests in patients presenting with chronic stablechest pain with suspected coronary artery disease: asystematic review. Eur Heart J Qual Care Clin Out-
comes . 2016;2:245 –260.
6.Gurunathan S, Zacharias K, Akhtar M, et al. Cost-
effectiveness of a management strategy based onexercise echocardiography versus exercise electrocar-
diography in patients presenting with suspected
angina during long term follow up: a randomizedstudy. Int J Cardiol . 2018;259:1 –7.
7.Mark DB, Federspiel JJ, Cowper PA, et al. Economic
outcomes with anatomical versus functional diagnostictesting for coronary artery disease. Ann Intern Med .
2016;165:94 –102.
5.3.4. Stress Nuclear MPI Cost-Value
Considerations
1.van Waardhuizen CN, Khanji MY, Genders TSS, et al.
Comparative cost-effectiveness of non-invasive imag-
ing tests in patients presenting with chronic stablechest pain with suspected coronary artery disease: asystematic review. Eur Heart J Qual Care Clin Out-
comes . 2016;2:245 –260.
2.Hlatky MA, Shilane D, Hachamovitch R, et al. Eco-
nomic outcomes in the Study of Myocardial Perfusionand Coronary Anatomy Imaging Roles in Coronary Ar-
tery Disease registry: the SPARC Study. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2014;63:1002 –1008 .
3.Douglas PS, Hoffmann U, Patel MR, et al. Outcomes
of anatomical versus functional testing for coronaryartery disease. N Engl J Med . 2015;372:1291 –1300 .
4.Sabharwal NK, Stoykova B, Taneja AK, et al.
A randomized trial of exercise treadmill ECG versusstress SPECT myocardial perfusion imaging as an initialdiagnostic strategy in stable patients with chest painand suspected CAD: cost analysis. J Nucl Cardiol .
2007;14:174 –186.
5.Thom H, West NE, Hughes V, et al. Cost-effectiveness
of initial stress cardiovascular MR, stress SPECT or stress
echocardiography as a gate-keeper test, compared with
upfront invasive coronary angiography in the investiga-tion and management of patients with stable chest pain:mid-term outcomes from the CECaT randomisedcontrolled trial. BMJ Open . 2014;4:e003419 .
5.3.5. Stress CMR Cost-Value Considerations
1.Pletscher M, Walker S, Moschetti K, et al. Cost-
effectiveness of functional cardiac imaging in the
diagnostic work-up of coronary heart disease. Eur
Heart J Qual Care Clin Outcomes . 2016;2:201 –207.
2.Walker S, Girardin F, McKenna C, et al. Cost-effec-
tiveness of cardiovascular magnetic resonance in theJACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021 Gulati et al .
NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285 2021 Chest Pain Guidelinee271

diagnosis of coronary heart disease: an economic
evaluation using data from the CE-MARC study. Heart .
2013;99:873 –881.
3.Moschetti K, Muzzarelli S, Pinget C, et al. Cost
evaluation of cardiovascular magnetic resonanceversus coronary angiography for the diagnostic work-
up of coronary artery disease: application of the Eu-
ropean Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance registrydata to the German, United Kingdom, Swiss, andUnited States health care systems. J Cardiovasc Magn
Reson . 2012;14:35 .
4.Kwong RY, Ge Y, Steel K, et al. Cardiac magnetic
resonance stress perfusion imaging for evaluation ofpatients with chest pain. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;74:
1741 –1755 .
5.Ge Y, Pandya A, Steel K, et al. Cost-
effectiveness analysis of stress cardiovascular
magnetic resonance imaging for stable chest painsyndromes. J Am Coll Cardiol Img . 2020;13:1505 –
1517.
6. EVIDENCE GAPS AND FUTURE
RESEARCH
1.Wang X, Bhatt DL. COVID-19: an unintended force
for medical revolution? J Invasive Cardiol . 2020;32:
E81–E82.2.Roux S, Bhatt DL. Self-treatment for acute cor-
onary syndrome: why not? Eur Heart J . 2020;41:
2144 –2145 .
3.Tamis-Holland JE, Jneid H, Reynolds HR, et al.
Contemporary diagnosis and management of patientswith myocardial infarction in the absence of obstruc-
tive coronary artery disease: a scienti ﬁc statement
from the American Heart Association. Circulation .
2019;139:e891 –e908 .
4.Gulati M, Shaw LJ. Bairey Merz CN. Myocardial
ischemia in women: lessons from the NHLBI WISEstudy. Clin Cardiol . 2012;35:141 –148.
5.Herscovici R, Sedlak T, Wei J, et al. Ischemia and no
obstructive coronary artery disease (INOCA): what isthe risk? J Am Heart Assoc . 2018;7:e008868 .
6.Mukherjee D. Myocardial infarction with non-
obstructive coronary arteries: a call for individualized
treatment. J Am Heart Assoc . 2019;8:e013361 .
7.Kreatsoulas C, Dinakar D, Mehta S, et al. Machine
learning to evaluate gender differences in typical and
atypical angina among patients with obstructive coro-nary artery disease. ESC Congress 2019. Paris, France .
2019 .
8.Bhatt DL, Taqueti VR. Out with the old rule-out:
raising the bar for acute chest pain evaluation withrandomized trials of cardiac imaging. J Am Coll Cardiol
Img. 2017;10:350 –353.9.Bhatt DL. Advancing the care of cardiac patients
using registry data: going where randomized clinicaltrials dare not. JAMA . 2010;303:2188 –2189 .
10.Ellrodt AG, Fonarow GC, Schwamm LH, et al. Syn-
thesizing lessons learned from get with the guidelines:the value of disease-based registries in improving
quality and outcomes. Circulation . 2013;128:2447 –2460 .
11.Bhatt DL, Drozda JP Jr, Shahian DM, et al. ACC/
AHA/STS statement on the future of registries and theperformance measurement enterprise: a report of theAmerican College of Cardiology/American Heart As-sociation Task Force on Performance Measures andThe Society of Thoracic Surgeons. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2015;66:2230 –2245 .
12.Winchester DE, Osborne A, Peacock WF, et al.
Closing gaps in essential chest pain care through
accreditation. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2020;75:2478
–2482 .
KEY WORDS ACC/AHA Clinical Practice
Guidelines, chest pain, angina, coronary artery
disease, acute coronary syndrome, myocardial
ischemia, myocardial infarction, myocardialinjury, noncardiac, accelerated diagnosticpathway, clinical decision pathway, sexdifferences, troponins, chest pain syndromes,biomarkers, shared decision-making, noncardiacchest pain, cardiac imagingGulati et al . JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
2021 Chest Pain Guideline NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285e272

Committee
Member Employment ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalPersonal
ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational, or
Other Financial
Bene ﬁtExpert
Witness
Martha Gulati
(Chair)The University of Arizona
Phoenix —Professor of Medicine &
Chief of CardiologyNone None None None None None
Phillip D. Levy
(Vice Chair)Wayne State University —
Professor and Associate Chair for
Research, Department of
Emergency Medicine; Assistant
Vice President for Translational
Science and Clinical Research
InnovationnApex Innovation *
nAstraZeneca
nAstraZeneca,
Hospital Quality
Foundation
nBeckman Coulter
nBoehringerIngelheim
nBristol-Myers
Squibb
nCardiorentis
nNovartis *
nOrtho
Diagnostics *
nPﬁzer
nRoche *
nSciex
nShire *
nSiemens *
nThe Medicines
Company
nTrevena
nZS PharmaNone nCarbon Life-
form
Innovations †
nMespere †nAmgen *
nBristol-Myers
Squibb *
nCardiorentis *
nEdwards
Lifesciences *
nGilead Sciences *
nNovartis *
nPﬁzer*
nRoche *
nShire *
nTrevenanAmgen *
nEdwards *
nE.R. Squibb &
Sons, L.L.C.
nJanssenPharmaceuticals
nRocheNone
Debabrata
Mukherjee
(Vice Chair)Texas Tech University Health
Sciences Center El Paso —
Chairman, Department of
MedicineNone None None None None None
Ezra Amsterdam UC Davis Medical Center —
Professor, Department of
Internal MedicineNone None None None None None
Deepak L. Bhatt Brigham and Women ’s Hospital
Heart & Vascular Center —
Executive Director of
Interventional Cardiovascular
Programs; Harvard Medical
School —Professor of MedicinenDaiichi Sankyo
nPﬁzer*None None nAbbott *
nAmarin *
nAmgen *
nAstraZeneca *
nBayer *
nBoehringer
Ingelheim *
nBristol-Myers
Squibb *
nCardax *
nChiesi *
nEisai *
nEli Lilly *
nEthicon *
nFlowCo †
nForest Laboratories *
nIdorsia *
nIronwood *
nIschemix *
nMedtronic *
nMerck *
nPﬁzer*nAmarin Pharma
Inc.*
nAstraZeneca *
nBiotronik ‡
nBoehringer
Ingelheim *
nBoston
Scienti ﬁc‡
nCardax †
nMerck †
nNovartis
nPhaseBio †
nPLx Pharma †
nRegado
Biosciences †
nSanoﬁ-aventis *
nSt. Jude
Medical ‡
nSvelte ‡None
Continued on the next pageAPPENDIX 1. AUTHOR RELATIONSHIPS WITH INDUSTRY AND OTHER ENTITIES (RELEVANT) —
2021 AHA/ACC/ASE/CHEST/SAEM/SCCT/SCMR GUI DELINE FOR THE EVALUATION AND DIAGNOSIS OF
CHEST PAINJACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021 Gulati et al .
NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285 2021 Chest Pain Guidelinee273

Committee
Member Employment ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalPersonal
ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational, or
Other Financial
Bene ﬁtExpert
Witness
nPhaseBio *
nPLx Pharma *
nRegeneron *
nRoche *
nSanoﬁ-aventis *
nSynaptic *
nTakeda †
nThe Medicines
Company *
Kim K. Birtcher University of Houston College of
Pharmacy —Clinical ProfessorNone None None None None None
Ron Blankstein Harvard Medical School —
Associate Professor of Medicine
and Radiology, Co-Director,
Cardiovascular Imaging Training
Program;
Brigham and Women ’s Hospital —
Associate Physician, Preventive
Cardiology; Director, Cardiac
Computed TomographynAmgen
nAstellas Inc
nEKOS Corp.None None nAmgen †
nAstellas Pharma †
nGilead Sciences †
nSanoﬁ-aventis †nSanoﬁUS
Services *None
Jack Boyd Stanford University —Clinical
Assistant Professor, Department
of Cardiothoracic SurgerynEsculon/Centese
nSorinNone None None None None
Renee P.
Bullock-PalmerDeborah Heart & Lung Center —
Director, Women ’s Heart Center;
Director, Non-Invasive Cardiac
ImagingNone None None None None None
Theresa Conejo Nazareth Hospital —Heart Failure
CoordinatorNone None None None None None
Deborah B.
DiercksUT Southwestern —Professor and
Chair, Department of Emergency
MedicinenETHealthcare
nJanssenPharmaceuticals
nNovartis *None None nAbbott *
nBristol-Myers
Squibb †
nOrtho Clinical †
nRoche *
nSiemensnE.R. Squibb &
Sons, L.L.C. *
nKonica Minolta
Healthcare
Americans, Inc.None
Federico Gentile Centro Cardiologico Gentile,
Naples, Italy —DirectorNone None None None None None
John P.
GreenwoodLeeds Institute of Cardiovascular
and Metabolic Medicine —
Mautner Chair of Cardiology,
Division of Biomedical ImagingNone None None None None None
Erik P. Hess University of Alabama at
Birmingham —Professor of
Emergency Medicine and Vice
Chair for Research, Department
of Emergency MedicinenGileadSciences *None None
nGilead
Sciences *None None
Steven M.
HollenbergCooper Medical School of Rowan
University —Professor of
Medicine;
Cooper University Hospital —
Director, Coronary Care UnitNone None None None None None
Wael A. Jaber Cleveland Clinic Lerner College
of Medicine —Professor of
Medicine, Department of
Cardiovascular Medicine and
Fuad Jubran Endowed Chair in
Cardiovascular Medicine, Heart
and Vascular InstituteNone None None None None None
Continued on the next pageAPPENDIX 1. CONTINUEDGulati et al . JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
2021 Chest Pain Guideline NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285e274

Continued on the next page
Committee
Member Employment ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalPersonal
ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational, or
Other Financial
Bene ﬁtExpert
Witness
Hani Jneid Baylor College of Medicine —
Associate Professor of Medicine;
The Michael DeBakey VA Medical
Center —Director of
Interventional Cardiology
ResearchNone None None None None None
José A. Joglar University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center —Professor of
Internal Medicine, Fellowship
Program Director, Clinical Cardiac
Electrophysiology, Elizabeth
Thaxton Page and Ellis Batten
Page, Professorship in Clinical
Cardiac Electrophysiology
ResearchNone None None None None None
David A. Morrow Brigham and Women ’s Hospital —
Director, Levine Cardiac Intensive
Care Unit; Harvard Medical
School —Professor of Medicine,
Cardiovascular DivisionnAbbott
nAralezPharmaceuticals *
nAstraZeneca *
nBayer *
nDaiichi Sankyo
ndiaDexus
nGilead Sciences
nGlaxoSmithKline *
nMerck *
nNovartis *
nPﬁzer*
nRoche *
nVerseonNone None nAbbott *
nAmgen *
nAstraZeneca *
nBRAHMS *
nDaiichi-Sankyo *
nEisai Corporation *
nGlaxoSmithKline *
nJohnson & Johnson *
nMedicines Company *
nMerck *
nNovartis *
nPﬁzer*
nRegeneron *
nRoche *
nSingulex *
nTakeda
Pharmaceuticals *nRoche *None
Robert E.
O’ConnorUniversity of Virginia —Professor
and Chair, Department of
Emergency MedicineNone None None None nCardiorentis
Ltd. †None
Michael A. Ross Emory University School of
Medicine —Professor, Department
of Emergency Medicine;
Emory Healthcare —Chief of
Service, Observation Medicine;
Emory University Hospital Chest
Pain Center —Medical DirectorNone None None None None None
Leslee J. Shaw Icahn School of Medicine, Mount
Sinai —ProfessorNone None None NonenCovanos,
Inc–Scienti ﬁc
Advisory Board †None
This table represents the relationships of committee members with industry and other entities that were determined to be relevant to this document. T hese relationships were
reviewed and updated in conjunction with all meetings and/or conference calls of the writing committee during the document development process. The table does not necessarily
reﬂect relationships with industry at the time of publication. A person is deemed to have a signi ﬁcant interest in a business if the interest represents ownership of $5% of the voting
stock or share of the business entity, or ownership of $$5,000 of the fair market value of the business entity, or if funds received by the person from the business entity exceed 5% of
the person ’s gross income for the previous year. Relationships that exist with no ﬁnancial bene ﬁt are also included for the purpose of transparency. Relationships in this table are
modest unless otherwise noted.
According to the ACC/AHA, a person has a relevant relationship IF: a) the relationship or interest relates to the same or similar subject matter, intellectual property or asset, topic, or
issue addressed in the document; or b) the company/entity (with whom the relationship exists) makes a drug, drug class, or device addressed in the document or makes a competing
drug or device addressed in the document ; or c) the person or a member of the person ’s household , has a reasonable potential for ﬁnancial, professional or other personal gain or loss as
a result of the issues/content addressed in the document . Writing committee members are required to recuse themselves from voting on sections to which their speci ﬁc relationships
with industry and other entities may apply.
*Signi ﬁcant relationship.
†Noﬁnancial bene ﬁt.
‡This disclosure was entered under the Clinical Trial Enroller category in the ACC ’s disclosure system. To appear in this category, the author acknowledges that there is no direct or
institutional relationship with the trial sponsor as de ﬁned in the ACC/AHA Disclosure Policy for Writing Committees.
ACC indicates American College of Cardiology; AHA, American Heart Association; ASE, American Society of Echocardiography; CHEST, American Colleg e of Chest Physicians; SAEM,
Society for Academic Emergency Medicine; SCCT, Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography; SCMR, Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonan ce; UC, University of California;
UT, University of Texas; and VA, Veterans Affairs.APPENDIX 1. CONTINUEDJACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021 Gulati et al .
NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285 2021 Chest Pain Guidelinee275

APPENDIX 2. REVIEWER RELATIONSHIPS WITH INDUSTRY AND OTHER ENTITIES (COMPREHENSIVE) —2021 AHA/ACC/ASE/CHEST/SAEM/SCCT/
SCMR GUIDELINE FOR THE EVALUATION AND DIAGNOSIS OF CHEST PAIN
Reviewer Representation Employment ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
Principal Personal ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational,
or Other
Financial Bene ﬁtExpert
Witness
Sana M. Al-
KhatibContent Reviewer —AHA Duke University Medical
CenternMedtronic
nMilestonePharmaceuticalsNone None
nAbbott
nMedtronic *
nNHLBI *
nPCORI *
nU.S. Food and
Drug
Administration *nAbbott
nAHA *
nBristol-Myers Squibb
nMedtronic
nPﬁzerNone
Mouaz Al-Mallah Of ﬁcial Reviewer —American
Society of Nuclear CardiologyHouston Methodist nPﬁzerNone None nSiemens † nAmgen
nGE Healthcare ‡*
nPﬁzer
nSiemensNone
Jayashri R.
AragamOfﬁcial Reviewer —American
Society of EchocardiographyWest Roxbury VA Hospital,
Harvard Medical SchoolNone None None None None None
Ragavendra
BaligaContent Reviewer —ACC/AHA Ohio State University
HospitalNone None None None nBaliga ’sTextbook of Internal Medi-
cine with 1480 MCQs, Editor-in-
Chief †
nElsevier, Deputy Editor †
nLippincott Willi ams & Wilkins
nMcGraw-Hill Cardiology Textbook,
Editor-in-Chief
nOxford University Press & Prze-
wodnik praktyczny jak stosowac
statyny, Termedia Wydawnictwa
Medyczne, Editor
nOxford University Press, Series
Editor
nSpringer, Co Editor-in-Chief
nW.B. Saunders/Elsevier, 250 Cases
in Clinical Medicine, Third EditionNone
Joshua A.
BeckmanContent Reviewer —ACC/AHA
Joint Committee on Clinical
Practice GuidelinesVanderbilt University
Medical CenternAmgen
nGlaxoSmithKline *
nJanOne
nJanssen
nPharmaceuticals *
nSanoﬁ-aventis *None nEMX †
nJanaCare †nBayer (DSMB)
nNovartis (DSMB)nAmgen
nGlaxoSmithKline
nVascular Interventional Advances *None
Continued on the next pageGulati et al . JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
2021 Chest Pain Guideline NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285e276

APPENDIX 2. CONTINUED
Reviewer Representation Employment ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
Principal Personal ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational,
or Other
Financial Bene ﬁtExpert
Witness
Daniel S. Berman Of ﬁcial Reviewer —AHA Cedars-Sinai Medical Center nBayer *
nCedars-Sinai
Medical Center *
nGeneral ElectricNone None None nAmgen *
nBayer
nCedars-Sinai Medical Center
nGE Healthcare *None
Kelley Branch Content Reviewer —Society of
Cardiovascular Computed
TomographyUniversity of Washington nBayer *
nJanssen
Pharmaceuticals *None None nBayer *
nLocke Founda-
tion Grant *
nNovartis ‡nAstraZeneca
nBayer *
nJanssen Pharmaceuticals
nNovartis
nSanoﬁ-aventisNone
Andrew Choi Of ﬁcial Reviewer —Society of
Cardiovascular Computed
TomographyThe George Washington
University School of
MedicineNone None nCleerly, Inc. *None None None
Melissa A.
DaubertOfﬁcial Reviewer —AHA Duke University Medical
CenterNone None None None n4D Molecular
Contrafect
nHeart ﬂow
nNIH
nRoche
nVerliyNone
Lisa de las
FuentesContent Reviewer —ACC/AHA
Joint Committee on Clinical
Practice GuidelinesWashington University nAcceleron
nAltavant
nArena
nBayer
nExpress Scripts
nGilead Sciences
nJohnson &
Johnson
nMentor Planning
and Consulting
nPhase Bio
nV-wave
nWebMD *nBayer *
nSimply
Speaking *None nAcceleron *
nAltavant *
nBayer
nComplexa *
nJohnson &
Johnson *
nLiquidia *
nMedtronic *
nNIH*
nReata
nTrio Analytics *
nUnited
Therapeutics *
nUniversity of
Kentucky (DSMB)
nUniversity of
Toronto (DSMB) †nACC †
nAHA †
nCirculation Journals
nPulmonary Hypertension
Association *None
Continued on the next pageJACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021 Gulati et al .
NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285 2021 Chest Pain Guidelinee277

APPENDIX 2. CONTINUED
Reviewer Representation Employment ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
Principal Personal ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational,
or Other
Financial Bene ﬁtExpert
Witness
Anita Deswal Content Reviewer —ACC/AHA
Joint Committee on Clinical
Practice GuidelinesUT MD Anderson Cancer
CenterNone None None None nACC
nAHA
nHFSA †None
Dave L. Dixon Content Reviewer —ACC/AHA
Joint Committee on Clinical
Practice GuidelinesVirginia Commonwealth
University School of
PharmacyAmerican Pharmacists
AssociationNone None nCenters for Dis-
ease Control and
Prevention *
nCommunity
Pharmacy
Foundation *nAccreditation Council for Clinical
Lipidology †
nAmerican College of Pharmacy
Cardiology Practice Research
Network †
nAmerican Pharmacists Association
nNational Lipid Association †None
John U. Doherty Of ﬁcial Reviewer —ACC Jefferson University
HospitalsNone None None None None None
Maros Ferencik Content Reviewer —Society of
Cardiovascular Computed
TomographyOregon Health & Science
UniversitynBiograph *None nAHA, Fellow to
Faculty Award *nNIH* nHeartFlow ‡None
Lee A. Fleisher Content Reviewer —ACC/AHA
Joint Committee on Clinical
Practice GuidelinesCenters for Medicare &
Medicaid Services (CMS)None None None nNIHNone None
Mario Garcia Content Reviewer —AHA/ACC Monte ﬁore Medical
CenterNone None None None nAbiomed
nMedtronic Vascular, Inc.
nNovartis
nPhilipsNone
Seth Gemme Of ﬁcial Reviewer —American
College of Emergency
PhysiciansBaystate Medical Center nRoche
DiagnosticsNone None None None None
Zachary D.
GoldbergerContent Reviewer —ACC/AHA
Joint Committee on Clinical
Practice GuidelinesUniversity of Wisconsin
School of Medicine and
Public HealthNone None None None None None
Bulent Gorenek Content Reviewer —ACC/AHA
Joint Committee on Clinical
Practice GuidelinesEskisehir Osmangazi
UniversitynAstraZeneca
nSandozNone None None None None
Norrisa Haynes Content Reviewer —ACC/AHA
Joint Committee on Clinical
Practice GuidelinesUniversity of Pennsylvania None None None None None None
Continued on the next pageGulati et al . JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
2021 Chest Pain Guideline NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285e278

APPENDIX 2. CONTINUED
Reviewer Representation Employment ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
Principal Personal ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational,
or Other
Financial Bene ﬁtExpert
Witness
Adrian F.
HernandezContent Reviewer —ACC/AHA
Joint Committee on Clinical
Practice GuidelinesDuke University nAmgen
nAstraZeneca *
nBayer
nBiofourmis
nBoehringer
Ingelheim
nBoston
Scienti ﬁc*
nCytokinetics
nDaiichi Sankyo
nEli Lilly
nMerck *
nMyokardia
nNovartis *
nPﬁzer
nRelypsa
nSanoﬁ-aventis *
nXogenexNone None nAmerican Regent
nAstraZeneca *
nEidos (DSMB)
nGenentech
nGlaxoSmithKline *
nJanssen
Pharmaceuticals
nMerck
nNIH †
nNovartis *
nPCORI †
nVerily *nAHA †
nAstraZeneca
nBoston Scienti ﬁc
nCSL Behring
nJanssen Pharmaceuticals *
nMerck
nNovartis
nGenentech *
nRelypsa
nSanoﬁ-aventisnDefendant,
Patent
Dispute,2019
Mark A. Hlatky Content Reviewer —ACC/AHA
Joint Committee on Clinical
Practice GuidelinesStanford University
School of Medicine nACC, GlobalAdvisory
Committee
nBlue Cross Blue
Shield Center for
Effectiveness
Evaluation *
nThe Medicines
CompanyNone None nHeartFlow *
nNHLBI (DSMB)
nSt. JudenGeorge Institute †None
Stephen Hoole Content Reviewer —ACC Royal Papworth
Hospital, UKnAbbott *
nBayer
nBoston Scienti ﬁcnAstraZeneca
nBayer
nNovo
NordiskNone nAbbott *
nAstraZeneca *None None
W. Schuyler
JonesContent Reviewer —ACC/AHA
Joint Committee on Clinical
Practice GuidelinesDuke University nAmgen
nBayer *
nJanssen
Pharmaceuticals *
nPﬁzerNone None nBristol-Myers
Squibb
nJanssen
Pharmaceuticals
nPatient-CenteredOutcomes
ResearchInstitutenAbbott *
nAmgen
nAstraZeneca
nBoehringer Ingelheim
nCardiovascular Systems Inc. *
nJanssen Pharmaceuticals
nZOLL MedicalNone
Continued on the next pageJACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021 Gulati et al .
NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285 2021 Chest Pain Guidelinee279

APPENDIX 2. CONTINUED
Reviewer Representation Employment ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
Principal Personal ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational,
or Other
Financial Bene ﬁtExpert
Witness
Michael Kontos Content Reviewer —ACC Virginia Commonwealth
University HealthNone None None None nACC*
nNIH ‡
nSociety for Academic Emergency
Medicine †
nVCSQUI †
nVHAC †None
Raymond Kwong Of ﬁcial Reviewer —Society for
Cardiovascular Magnetic
ResonanceBrigham and Women ’s
HospitalNone None None nAlnylam, Inc *
nMyoKardia *
nNIHnBayer
nSiemens
nSociety for Cardiovascular Magnetic
Resonance †None
Glenn N. Levine Content Reviewer —Former
Chair of the ACC/AHA Task
Force on Clinical Practice
GuidelinesBaylor College of Medicine None None None None None nDefendant,
In-hospital
death, 2020
nDefendant,
In-hospital
death, 2019 *
Jonathan
LindnerOfﬁcial Reviewer —American
Society of EchocardiographyOregon Health & Science
UniversityNone None None nBracco †
nGE Healthcare
nGE Lifesciences †
nPﬁzer†nLantheus Medical Imaging, Inc.None
G.B. John
ManciniContent Reviewer —ACC Vancouver Hospital
Research Pavilion, Professor
of MedicinenAmgen
nAstraZeneca
nBayer
nBoehringerIngelheim
nEli Lilly
nEsperion
nHLS Therapeutics
nMerck
nPﬁzer
nRegeneron
nSanoﬁ-aventisnAmgen
nHLS
Therapeutics
nSanoﬁ-
aventisNone nNovo Nordisk
nNovartisPleNone None
Daniel B. Mark Content Reviewer —ACC/AHA
Joint Committee on Clinical
Practice GuidelinesDuke University None None None None nHeartFlow *
nMerck *None
Jim McCord Content Reviewer —ACC/AHA Henry Ford Health System nBeckman
nRoche *
nSiemens *None None nAbbott *
nBeckman
Diagnostics *
nRoche *
nSiemensnACC Accreditation Services, Board
Member †None
Continued on the next pageGulati et al . JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
2021 Chest Pain Guideline NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285e280

APPENDIX 2. CONTINUED
Reviewer Representation Employment ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
Principal Personal ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational,
or Other
Financial Bene ﬁtExpert
Witness
C. Noel Bairey
MerzContent Reviewer —ACC/AHA Cedars-Sinai Heart Institute nMed IntelligenceNone None nCalifornia Insti-
tute for Precision
Medicine *
nDOD Warrior *
nNIH-NIA *
nSanoﬁ-aventis *
nWISE pre-HFpEF *nBayer, Advisory Board
niRhythm *None
Nicholas L. Mills Content Reviewer —ACC BHF Centre for
Cardiovascular Science,
University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh, ScotlandnAbbott
nLaboratories
nLumiraDx
nRoche
Diagnostics
nSiemensHealthineersNone None None None None
James Min Content Reviewer —ACC/AHA
nCleerly, Inc.None None nCleerly, Inc. nNIH nAblative Solutions
nArineta
nMemphis MeatsNone
L. Kristin Newby Content Reviewer —ACC Duke University nBeckman-Coulter
nBioKier
nBristol-Myers
Squibb
nCSL
nMedtronic
nNHLBI
nQuidel
nRoche
DiagnosticsNone None nBoehringer
Ingelheim
nDavid H. Murdock
Institute for
Business and
Culture
nNIH
nNorth CarolinaDHHSnAHA †
nACC, Oregon Chapter
nAstraZeneca †
nBoehringer Ingelheim
nDavid H. Murdock Research
Institute †
nJACC , Deputy Editor *
nRoche DiagnosticsNone
Patrick T. O ’Gara Content Reviewer —ACC/AHA
Joint Committee on Clinical
Practice GuidelinesBrigham and Women ’s
HospitalNone None None None nEdwards Lifesciences †
nJAMA Cardiology *
nNIH*
nMedtrace †
nMedtronic †
nMedtronic Vascular, Inc.None
Continued on the next pageJACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021 Gulati et al .
NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285 2021 Chest Pain Guidelinee281

APPENDIX 2. CONTINUED
Reviewer Representation Employment ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
Principal Personal ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational,
or Other
Financial Bene ﬁtExpert
Witness
Kevin O ’Neil Content Reviewer —American
College of Chest PhysiciansWilmington Health, PLLC None None None None nAmerican Board of Internal
Medicine
nAstellas Pharma
nCommission on Accreditation forRespiratory Care †
nGenentech
nGenzyme
nGlaxoSmithKline
nInsmed
nOtsuka
nAmerica Pharmaceuticals
nPhilips
nResmed Corp
nSunovion PharmaceuticalsNone
W. Frank
PeacockContent Reviewer —AHA Baylor College of
MedicinenAbbott
nAstraZeneca
nInstrumentation
Laboratories
nJanssen
Pharmaceuticals *
nMedicure
nPharma Inc.
nQuidel
nRelypsa
nSiemensNone nComprehensive
ResearchAssociates *
nEmergencies in
Medicine †nRoche * nAbbott
nAseptiscope *
nAstellas Pharma
nAstraZeneca
nBeckman Coulter, Inc. *
nBoehringer Ingelheim *
nDiaSorin S.P.A. *
nE.R. Squibb & Sons, L.L.C. *
nInstrumentation Laboratory
Company *
nJanssen Pharmaceuticals *
nMedicure Pharma Inc.
nQuidel
nRelypsa
nRoche *
nSalix Pharmaceutical Division of
Bausch Health US, LLC
nSiemens *None
Continued on the next pageGulati et al . JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
2021 Chest Pain Guideline NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285e282

APPENDIX 2. CONTINUED
Reviewer Representation Employment ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
Principal Personal ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational,
or Other
Financial Bene ﬁtExpert
Witness
Carl Pepine Content Reviewer —ACC/AHA University of Florida nCaladrius
nBiosciences
nElsevier
nSlack Inc. *
nVerily
nXyloCorNone None nBiocardia *
nBrigham and
Women ’s
Hospital *
nCSL Behring *
nCytori
Therapeutics *‡
nDCRI *
nGE Healthcare
nInVentive Health
Clinical, LLC ‡
nMesoblast *
nNIH ‡
nNIH/NHLBI *
nPﬁzer
nSanoﬁ-aventis ‡
nU.S. Department
of Defense *None None
Andrea L. Price Content Reviewer —ACC Indiana University Health None None nQuality Infor-
matics Syn-
ergies, LLCnACC, Accredita-
tion Foundation
Board *None None
Susan B. Promes Of ﬁcial Reviewer —American
College of Emergency
PhysiciansPenn State Health Milton S.
Hershey Medical CenterNone None None None None None
Tanveer Rab Content Reviewer —ACC Emory University None None None None None None
Harish
RamakrishnaContent Reviewer —ACC Mayo Clinic None None None None None None
Basmah Safdar Of ﬁcial Reviewer —Society for
Academic Emergency MedicineYale School of Medicine None None None None nOrthoClinical *
nRoche *None
Michael Salerno Content Reviewer —Society for
Cardiovascular Magnetic
ResonanceUniversity of Virginia None None None nNIH* nHeart ﬂow
nSiemensnDefendant,
SPECT Cam-
era Malfunc-
tion, 2020
Ada Stefanescu
SchmidtContent Reviewer —ACC University of Toronto;
Harvard UniversityNone None None None None None
Prem Soman Of ﬁcial Reviewer —American
Society of Nuclear CardiologyUniversity of Pittsburgh
Medical CenternAlnylam Pharma
nEidos
nPﬁzerNone None None nAstellas
nPharma *
nPﬁzerNone
Continued on the next pageJACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021 Gulati et al .
NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285 2021 Chest Pain Guidelinee283

APPENDIX 2. CONTINUED
Reviewer Representation Employment ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
Principal Personal ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational,
or Other
Financial Bene ﬁtExpert
Witness
Jacqueline
Tamis-
HollandContent Reviewer —ACC/AHA
Joint Committee on Clinical
Practice GuidelinesMount Sinai Morningside
HospitalNone None None nInternal-Minne-
apolis Heart
Institute †
nThe NGS Predict
Study ‡nAbbott †
nAHA †
nBronx Lebanon Hospital, Cardiology
Fellowship Program Director †
nMedscape/Heart.org
nNIH †‡
nNYS †None
James Thomas Content Reviewer —ACC/AHA Northwestern Medicine nAbbott
nCaption Health *
nEdwards
Lifesciences *
nGeneral Electric
nShire North
American GroupInc.*None None
nAbbott
nCaption Health
nGeneral ElectricnAbbott
nCaption Health *
nEdwards Lifesciences *
nMedtronic Vascular, Inc.
nShire North American Group Inc.None
Todd Villines Of ﬁcial Reviewer —Society of
Cardiovascular Computed
Tomography and ACCUniversity of Virginia Health
SystemNone None None None None None
Andrew R.
WaxlerOfﬁcial Reviewer —ACC Penn State Health None nAmarin *
nRegeneron *
nSanoﬁ-
aventis *None None nAbbott
nAmarin *
nAmgen
nBoehringer Ingelheim
nDalCor Pharmaceuticals
nJanssen Pharmaceuticals
nNovartis
nPenn State-St. Joseph Medical
Center Foundation, Board Member †
nPenn State —St. Joseph Medical
Center Pharmacy and Therapeutics,Committee Member †
nPortola
nRegeneron
nSanoﬁ-aventis
nThe Medicines Company
nZOLL MedicalNone
Continued on the next pageGulati et al . JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021
2021 Chest Pain Guideline NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285e284

APPENDIX 2. CONTINUED
Reviewer Representation Employment ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
Principal Personal ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational,
or Other
Financial Bene ﬁtExpert
Witness
Nanette K.
WengerContent Reviewer —AHA Emory University nAmarin Pharma,
Inc.
nAstraZeneca
nJanssenPharmaceuticalsNone None
nAstraZeneca †
nBoehringer
Ingelheim
nU.S. Department
of Defense
nDuke ClinicalResearch
Institute †
nNHLBI †
nZOLL Medical †None None
Joseph Woo Content Reviewer —ACC/AHA
Joint Committee on Clinical
Practice GuidelinesStanford University School
of MedicineNone None None None nNIH*None
Sammy Zakaria Of ﬁcial Reviewer —American
College of Chest PhysiciansJohns Hopkins University
School of MedicineNone None None None None None
Mark J. Zucker Of ﬁcial Reviewer —American
College of Chest PhysiciansNewark Beth Israel Medical
CenterNone None None None None None
This table represents all relationships of reviewers with industry and other entities that were reported at the time of peer review, including those n ot deemed to be relevant to this document, at the time this document was under review. The table does not
necessarily re ﬂect relationships with industry at the time of publication. A person is deemed to have a signi ﬁcant interest in a business if the interest represents ownership of $5% of the voting stock or share of the business entity, or ownership
of$$5000 of the fair market value of the business entity, or if funds received by the person from the business entity exceed 5% of the person ’s gross income for the previous year. Relationships that exist with no ﬁnancial bene ﬁt are also included for the
purpose of transparency. Relationships in this table are modest unless otherwise noted. Names are listed in alphabetical order within each category of review. Please refer to https://www.acc.org/guidelines/about-guidelines-and-clinical-documents/
relationships-with-industry-policy for de ﬁnitions of disclosure categories or additional information about the ACC/AHA Disclosure Policy for Writing Committees.
*Signi ﬁcant relationship.
†Noﬁnancial bene ﬁt.
‡This disclosure was entered under the Clinical Trial Enroller category in the ACC ’s disclosure system. To appear in this category, the author acknowledges that there is no direct or institutional relationship with the trial sponsor as de ﬁned in the (ACCF or
AHA/ACC) Disclosure Policy for Writing Committees.
ACC indicates American College of Cardiology; ACCF, American College of Cardiology Foundation; AHA, American Heart Association; ASE, American Soc iety of Echocardiography; ASNC, American Society of Nuclear Cardiology; CHEST, American College
of Chest Physicians; DCRI, Duke Clinical Research Institute; DHHS, Department of Health and Human Services; DOD, Department of Defense; DSMB, data a nd safety monitoring board; HFSA, Heart Failure Society of America; JACC ,Journal of the American
College of Cardiology ; NHLBI, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; NIA, National Institute on Aging; NIH, National Institutes of Health; NYS, New York state; PCORI, Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute; SAEM, Society for Academic
Emergency Medicine; SCCT, Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography; SCMR, Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance; UT, University of Texas; VCSQI, Virginia Cardiac Services Quality Initiative; VA, Veterans Affairs; and VHAC, Virginia
Heart Attack Coalition.JACC VOL. 78, NO. 22, 2021 Gulati et al .
NOVEMBER 30, 2021:e187 –e285 2021 Chest Pain Guidelinee285