CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINE
2024 ACC/AHA/AACVPR/APMA/
ABC/SCAI/SVM/SVN/SVS/SIR/VESS
Guideline for the Management of Lower
Extremity Peripheral Artery Disease
A Report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association
Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines
Developed in Collaboration With and Endorsed by the American Association of Cardiovascular and
Pulmonary Rehabilitation, American Podiatric Medical Association, Association of Black Cardiologists,
Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, Society for Vascular Medicine,
Society for Vascular Nursing, Society for Vascular Surgery, Society of Interventional Radiology, andVascular & Endovascular Surgery Society
Writing
CommitteeMembers *Heather L. Gornik, MD, FAHA, MSVM, Chair
Herbert D. Aronow, MD, MPH, FACC, FSCAI, FSVM,Co-Vice-ChairPhilip P. Goodney, MD, MS, DFSVS, Co-Vice-Chair
Shipra Arya, MD, SM
Luke Packard Brewster, MD, P
HD, MA, RVT, DFSVS,
FAHA y
Lori Byrd, MS z
Venita Chandra, MD x
Douglas E. Drachman, MD, FACC, FSCAIJennifer M. Eaves, DNP, MSN, RNJonathan K. Ehrman, P
HD, FACC, FAHA, FAACVPR k
John N. Evans, DPM {
Thomas S.D. Getchius
J. Antonio Gutiérrez, MD, MHSBeau M. Hawkins, MD, FACC, FSCAI, FSVMConnie N. Hess, MD, MHS, FACC, FAHA, FSCAIKaren J. Ho, MD, FAHAW. Schuyler Jones, MD, FACC
#
Esther S.H. Kim, MD, MPH, FAHA, FSVM **
Scott Kinlay, MBBS, P HD, FACC, FAHA
Lee Kirksey, MD, MBA yyDebra Kohlman-Trigoboff, RN, MS, ACNP-BC, CVN
Chandler A. Long, MDAmy West Pollak, MD, MS
C, FAHA
Saher S. Sabri, MDLawrence B. Sadwin, z
Eric A. Secemsky, MD, MS
C, FACC, FAHA, FSCAI, FSVM
Maya Serhal, MD, FACC
Mehdi H. Shishehbor, DO, MPH, P HD, FACC, FSVM zz
Diane Treat-Jacobson, P HD, RN, MSVM, FAHA xx
Luke R. Wilkins, MD, FSIR kk
*Writing committee members are required to recuse themselves from
voting on sections to which their speci ﬁc relationships with industry may
apply; see Appendix 1 for detailed information.
yVESS representative.
zLayperson or patient representative.
xSVS representative.
kAACVPR representative.
{APMA representative.
#AHA/ACC Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines liaison.**SVM representative.yyABC representative.
zzSCAI representative.
xxSVN representative.
kkSIR representative.
ISSN 0735-1097/$36.00 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2024.02.013JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN COLLEGE OF CARDIOLOGY VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
ª2024 BY THE AMERICAN COLLEGE OF CARDIOLOGY FOUNDATION AND THE
AMERICAN HEART ASSOCIATION, INC. PUBLISHED BY ELSEVIER.

Peer Review
CommitteeMembersMark A. Creager, MD, FACC, FAHA Chair
Naomi M. Hamburg, MD, FACC, Vice-Chair
Olamide Alabi, MD
S. Elissa Altin, MD, P HD
Subhash Banerjee, MD, FACC zz
Merry Ellen Barnett, MD
Robert Baulieu, MD y
Marc P. Bonaca, MD, FACC, FAHAYulanka Castro-Dominguez, MD, FACCFoluso Fakorede, MDLaura Findeiss, MD, FSIR, FAHAYolanda Hendley, MD, MS
C, FACC yy
Daniella Kadian-Dodov, MD, FACCAhmed Kayssi, MD x
Anna K. Krawisz, MDMary M. McDermott, MDMatthew T. Menard, MDSanjay Misra, MD, FAHA, SIR kk
Manesh R. Patel, MD, FACC
Rene Quiroz, MDElizabeth V. Ratchford, MDCatherine R. Ratliff, P
HD, GNP-BC, CWOCN, CFCN xx
Jeffrey A. Ross, MD, DPM {
Kerry J. Steward, E DDk
Leben Tefera, MD **
Gabriela Velazquez, MD
Michael N. Young, MD, FACC
AHA/ACC Joint
Committee onClinical PracticeGuidelinesJoshua A. Beckman, MD, MS, FACC, FAHA, Chair
Catherine M. Otto, MD, MS, FACC, FAHA,Chair-ElectPatrick T. O ’Gara, MD, MACC, FAHA,
Immediate Past Chair {{
Anastasia Armbruster, P
HARM D, FACC
Kim K. Birtcher, P HARM D, MS, FACC {{
Leslie L. Davis, P HD, ANP-BC, FACC, FAHA
Lisa de las Fuentes, MD, MS, FAHA {{
Anita Deswal, MD, MPH, FACC, FAHA {{
Dave L. Dixon, P HARM D, FACC {{
Víctor A. Ferrari, MD, FACC, FAHA
Zachary D. Goldberger, MD, MS, FACC, FAHA {{
Bulent Gorenek, MD, FACC {{
Norrisa Haynes, MD, MPH {{
Adrian F. Hernandez, MD, MHS {{
Hani Jneid, MD, FACC, FAHA, FSCAIJosé A. Joglar, MD, FACC, FAHA {{
Heather M. Johnson, MD, MS, FACC, FAHA
W. Schuyler Jones, MD, FACCSadiya S. Kahn, MD, MSc, FACC, FAHA
Prateeti Khazanie, MD, MPH, FAHAMichelle M. Kittleson, MD, P
HD, FACC, FAHA
Daniel Mark, MD, MPH, FACC, FAHA {{
Venu Menon, MD, FACC, FAHA
Debabrata Mukherjee, MD, FACC, FAHA,FSCAILatha Palaniappan, MD, MS, FACC, FAHA {{
Mariann R. Piano, RN, P
HD, FAHA {{
Tanveer Rab, MD, FACCDaichi Shimbo, MDErica S. Spatz, MD, MS, FACC {{
Jacqueline E. Tamis-Holland, MD, FACC, FAHA,
FSCAIY. Joseph Woo, MD, FACC, FAHABoback Ziaeian, MD, P
HD, FACC, FAHA
{{Former Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines member;
current member during the writing effort.
This document was approved by the American College of Cardiology Clinical Policy Approval Committee in December 2023, the American
Heart Association Science Advisory and Coordinating Committee in January 2024, and the American College of Cardiology Science andQuality Committee and the American Heart Association Executive Committee in February 2024.
The American College of Cardiology requests that this document be cited as follows: Gornik HL, Aronow HD, Goodney PP, Arya S, Brewster
LP, Byrd L, Chandra V, Drachman DE, Eaves JM, Ehrman JK, Evans JN, Getchius TSD, Gutiérrez JA, Hawkins BM, Hess CN, Ho KJ, Jones WS,Kim ESH, Kinlay S, Kirksey L, Kohlman-Trigoboff D, Long CA, Pollak AW, Sabri SS, Sadwin LB, Secemsky EA, Serhal M, Shishehbor MH,Treat-Jacobson D, Wilkins LR. 2024 ACC/AHA/AACVPR/APMA/ABC/SCAI/SVM/SVN/SVS/SIR/VESS guideline for the management of lowerextremity peripheral artery disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on ClinicalPractice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2024;83(24):2497-2604.
This article has been copublished in Circulation .
Copies: This document is available on the websites of the American College of Cardiology ( www.acc.org ) and the American Heart As-
sociation ( professional.heart.org ). For copies of this document, please contact the Elsevier Inc. Reprint Department via fax (212-633-3820) or
e-mail ( reprints@elsevier.com ).
Permissions: Multiple copies, modi ﬁcation, alteration, enhancement, and/or distribution of this document are not permitted without the
express permission of the American College of Cardiology. Requests may be completed online via the Elsevier site ( https://www.elsevier.
com/about/policies-and-standards/copyright/permissions ).Gornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042498

ABSTRACT
AIM The “2024 ACC/AHA/AACVPR/APMA/ABC/SCAI/SVM/SVN/SVS/SIR/VESS Guideline for the Management of Lower
Extremity Peripheral Artery Disease ”provides recommendations to guide clinicians in the treatment of patients with lower extremity
peripheral artery disease across its multiple clinical presentation subsets (ie, asymptomatic, chronic symptomatic, chronic limb-threatening ischemia, and acute limb ischemia).
METHODS A comprehensive literature search was conducted from October 2020 to June 2022, encompassing studies,
reviews, and other evidence conducted on human subjects that was published in English from PubMed, EMBASE, the CochraneLibrary, CINHL Complete, and other selected databases relevant to this guideline. Additional relevant studies, published through May
2023 during the peer review process, were also considered by the writing committee and added to the evidence tables where
appropriate.
STRUCTURE Recommendations from the “2016 AHA/ACC Guideline on the Management of Patients With Lower Extremity
Peripheral Artery Disease ”have been updated with new evidence to guide clinicians. In addition, new recommendations addressing
comprehensive care for patients with peripheral artery disease have been developed.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ABSTRACT .................................... 2499
TOP 10 TAKE-HOME MESSAGES ................. 2500
PREAMBLE .................................... 2500
1. Introduction ................................ 2502
1.1. Methodology and Evidence Review .......... 2502
1.2. Organization of the Writing Committee ...... 2502
1.3. Document Review and Approval ............ 2502
1.4. Scope of the Guideline .................... 2502
1.5. Class of Recommendations and
Level of Evidence ........................ 2505
1.6. Abbreviations ............................ 2506
2. Clinical Assessment for PAD ................... 2506
2.1. Recognizing Clinical Subsets of PAD ......... 2506
2.2. History and Physical Examination to Assess
for PAD ................................. 2508
3. Diagnostic Testing for PAD .................... 2510
3.1. Resting ABI and Additional Physiological
Testing ................................. 2510
3.2. Imaging for PAD ......................... 2514
4. Special Considerations in PAD: Risk Ampli ﬁers,
Health Disparities, and PAD in Older Patients ..... 2516
4.1. Ampli ﬁers of Cardiovascular and Limb-Related
Risk in Patients With PAD ................. 2516
4.2. Health Disparities in PAD .................. 2519
4.2.1. Race and Ethnicity .................. 2520
4.2.2. Female Sex ........................ 2520
4.2.3. Geography and Socioeconomic Status ...25214.3. Considerations in Management of PAD in
Older Patients ........................... 2521
5. Medical Therapy and Preventive Foot Care for
Patients With PAD ........................... 2522
5.1. Antiplatelet and Antithrombotic Therapy
for PAD ................................ 2523
5.2. Lipid-Lowering Therapy for PAD ............ 2527
5.3. Antihypertensive Therapy for PAD .......... 2528
5.4. Smoking Cessation for PAD ................ 2529
5.5. Diabetes Management for PAD ............. 2531
5.6. Other Medical Therapies for Cardiovascular Risk
Reduction in PAD ........................ 2532
5.7. Medications for Leg Symptoms in Chronic
Symptomatic PAD ........................ 2534
5.8. Preventive Foot Care for PAD .............. 2535
6. Exercise Therapy for PAD ..................... 2537
7. Revascularization for Asymptomatic PAD ........ 2541
8. Revascularization Techniques and Registries for
Chronic Symptomatic PAD and CLTI ............ 2542
9. Revascularization for Claudication (Chronic
Symptomatic PAD) ........................... 2542
9.1. Revascularization for Claudication .......... 2544
9.2. Conduit for Surgical Revascularization for
Femoropopliteal Disease .................. 2547
10. Management of CLTI ......................... 2548
10.1. Team-Based Care for CLTI ................ 2548
10.2. Revascularization for CLTI ................ 2550
10.3. Minimizing Tissue Loss for CLTI ........... 2554
10.3.1. Pressure Of ﬂoading for CLTI ........ 2554JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2499

10.3.2. Wound Care and Management of Infec-
tion for CLTI ...................... 2555
10.3.3. Approach to the “No Option ”Patient
With CLTI ....................... 2556
10.3.4. Amputation for CLTI .............. 2558
11. Acute Limb Ischemia ......................... 2560
11.1. Initial Clinical Evaluation and Diagnostic
Approach to ALI ......................... 2561
11.2. Management of ALI ...................... 2562
11.2.1. Revascularization for ALI ............ 2562
11.2.2. Adjunctive Therapies to Minimize
Tissue Loss in ALI .................. 2564
11.2.3. Anticoagulation for ALI ............. 2565
11.3. Diagnostic Evaluation for the Cause of ALI ...2566
12. Longitudinal Follow-Up of PAD ................ 2567
13. Evidence Gaps and Advocacy Priorities for PAD ...2570
13.1. Evidence Gaps .......................... 2570
13.2. Advocacy Priorities ...................... 2570
REFERENCES ................................. 2572
APPENDIX 1
Author Relationships With Industry and
Other Entities .................................. 2595
APPENDIX 2
Reviewer Relationships With Industry andOther Entities
.................................. 2601
TOP 10 TAKE-HOME MESSAGES
1. Peripheral artery disease (PAD) is a common cardio-
vascular disease associated with increased risk ofa m p u t a t i o n ,m y o c a r d i a li n f a r c t i o n ,s t r o k e ,a n dd e a t h ,as well as impaired quality of life (QOL), walkingperformance, and functional status.
2. This guideline de ﬁnes 4 clinical subsets of PAD:
asymptomatic PAD (may have functional impair-ment), chronic symptomatic PAD (including claudi-
cation), chronic limb-threatening ischemia, and acute
limb ischemia.
3. Detection of PAD in most patients is accomplished
through the history, physical examination, andresting ankle-brachial index.
4. Health disparities in PAD are associated with poor
limb and cardiovascular outcomes and must beaddressed at the individual patient and population
levels, with interventions coordinated between mul-
tiple stakeholders across the cardiovascular commu-nity and public health infrastructure.
5. Effective medical therapies for patients with PAD
should be prescribed to prevent major adverse car-diovascular events and major adverse limb events forpatients with PAD, including antiplatelet (generally
single antiplatelet) and antithrombotic therapy, lipid-lowering (ie, high-intensity statin) and antihyperten-sive therapy, management of diabetes, and smokingcessation. Rivaroxaban (2.5 mg twice daily) combined
with low-dose aspirin (81 mg daily) is effective to
prevent major adverse cardiovascular events andmajor adverse limb events in patients with PAD whoare not at increased risk of bleeding.
6. Structured exercise is a core component of care for
patients with PAD. It includes supervised exercisetherapy and community-based (including structuredhome-based) programs.
7. Revascularization (endovascular, surgical, or hybrid)
should be used to prevent limb loss in those withchronic limb-threatening ischemia and can be used toimprove QOL and functional status in patients withclaudication not responsive to medical therapy andstructured exercise.
8. Care for patients with PAD, and especially those with
chronic limb-threatening i schemia, is optimized when
delivered by a multispecialty care team.
9. Foot care is crucial for patients with PAD across all
clinical subsets and ranges from preventive care andpatient education to advanced care in the setting ofchronic limb-threatening i schemia. Podiatrists and
other specialists with expertise in foot care, wound-healing therapies, and fo ot surgery are important
members of the multispecialty care team.
10. The PAD National Action Plan outlines 6 strategic
goals to improve awareness, detection, and treatmentof PAD nationwide. Implementation of this actionplan is recognized as a top advocacy priority by thewriting committee.
PREAMBLE
Since 1980, the American College of Cardiology (ACC) andAmerican Heart Association (AHA) have translated scien-tiﬁc evidence into clinical prac tice guidelines with rec-
ommendations to improve cardiovascular health. These
guidelines, which are based on systematic methods to
evaluate and classify evidence, provide a foundation forthe delivery of quality cardiovascular care. The ACC andAHA sponsor the development and publication of clinicalpractice guidelines without commercial support, andmembers volunteer their time to the writing and reviewefforts. Guidelines are the of ﬁcial policy of the ACC and
AHA. For some guidelines, the ACC and AHA partner with
other organizations.
Intended Use
Clinical practice guidelines provide recommendations
applicable to patients with or at risk of developingGornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042500

cardiovascular disease (CVD). The focus is on medical
practice in the United States, but these guidelines arerelevant to patients throughout the world. Althoughguidelines may be used to inform regulatory or payerdecisions, the intent is to improve quality of care and
align with patients ’interests. Guidelin es are intended to
deﬁne practices meeting the needs of patients in most,
but not all, circumstances and should not replace clinicaljudgment.
Clinical Implementation
Management, in accordance with guideline recommen-
dations, is effective only when followed by both practi-tioners and patients. Adherence to recommendations canbe enhanced by shared decision-making between clini-cians and patients, with patient engagement in selectinginterventions based on individual values, preferences,and associated conditions and comorbidities.
Methodology and Modernization
The AHA/ACC Joint Committee on Clinical Practice
Guidelines (Joint Committee) continuously reviews, up-dates, and modi ﬁes guideline methodology on the basis of
published standards from organizations, including theInstitute of Medicine,
1,2and on the basis of internal
reevaluation. Similarly, presentation and delivery of
guidelines are reevaluated and modi ﬁed in response to
evolving technologies and other factors to optimallyfacilitate dissemination of information to health careprofessionals at the point of care.
Numerous modi ﬁcations to the guidelines have been
implemented to make them shorter and enhance “user
friendliness. ”Guidelines are written and presented in a
modular, “knowledge chunk ”format, in which each
chunk includes a table of recommendations, a brief syn-opsis, recommendation-speci ﬁcs u p p o r t i v et e x t ,a n d
when appropriate, ﬂow diagrams or additional tables.
Hyperlinked references are provided for each modularknowledge chunk to facilitate quick access and review.
In recognition of the importance of cost –value consid-
erations, in certain guidelines, when appropriate and
feasible, an analysis of value for a drug, device, or inter-
vention may be performed in accordance with the ACC/AHA methodology.
3
To ensure that guideline recommendations remain
current, new data will be reviewed on an ongoing basis bythe writing committee and staff. Going forward, targetedsections/knowledge chunks will be revised dynamicallyafter publication and timely peer review of potentially
practice-changing science. The previous designations of
“full revision ”and “focused update ”will be phased out.
For additional information and policies on guidelinedevelopment, readers may consult the ACC/AHA guide-
line methodology manual
4and other methodology arti-
cles.5-7
Selection of Writing Committee Members
The Joint Committee strives to ensure that the guideline
writing committee contains requisite content expertise
and is representative of the broader cardiovascularcommunity by selection of experts across a spectrum ofbackgrounds, representing different geographic regions,sexes, races, ethnicities, inte llectual perspectives/biases,
and clinical practice settings. Organizations andprofessional societies with r elated interests and exper-
tise are invited to participate as partners or
collaborators.
Relationships With Industry and Other Entities
The ACC and AHA have rigorous policies and methods to
ensure that documents are developed without bias orimproper in ﬂuence. The complete policy on relationships
with industry and other entities (RWI) can be found
online .Appendix 1 of the guideline lists writing commit-
tee members ’comprehensive and relevant RWI; for the
purposes of full transparency, comprehensive and rele-vant disclosure information for the Joint Committee isalso available online .
Evidence Review and Evidence Review Committees
In developing recommendations, the writing committee
uses evidence-based methodologies that are based on allavailable data.
4,5Literature searches focus on randomized
controlled trials (RCTs) but also include registries, non-randomized comparative and descriptive studies, case
series, cohort studies, systematic reviews, and expert
opinion. Only key ref erences are cited.
An independent evidence review committee is
commissioned when there is $1 question deemed of
utmost clinical importance and merit formal systematicreview to determine which patients are most likely tobene ﬁt from a drug, device, or treatment strategy, and to
what degree. Criteria for commissioning an evidence re-
view committee and formal systematic review include
absence of a current authoritative systematic review,feasibility of de ﬁning the bene ﬁt and risk in a time frame
consistent with the writing of a guideline, relevance to a
substantial number of patients, and likelihood that theﬁndings can be translated into actionable recommenda-
tions. Evidence review committee members may includemethodologists, epidemiologists, clinicians, and bio-
statisticians. Recommendati ons developed by the writing
committee on the basis of the systematic review aremarked “
SR.”JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2501

Guideline-Directed Management and Therapy
The term guideline-directed management and therapy
(GDMT) encompasses clinical evaluation, diagnostic
testing, and both pharmacological and procedural treat-
ments. For these and all recommended drug treatmentregimens, the reader should con ﬁrm dosage with product
insert material and evaluat e for contraindications and
interactions. Recommendations are limited to drugs, de-vices, and treatments approved for clinical use in theUnited States.
Joshua A. Beckman, MD, MS, FAHA, FACC, Chair
AHA/ACC Joint Committee on
Clinical Practice Guidelines
1. INTRODUCTION
1.1. Methodology and Evidence Review
The recommendations listed in this guideline are, when-
ever possible, evidence based. An initial extensive evi-dence review, which included literature derived fromresearch involving human subjects, published in English,
and indexed in MEDLINE (through PubMed), EMBASE,
the Cochrane Library, the Agency for Healthcare Researchand Quality, and other selected databases relevant to this
guideline, was conducted from October 2020 to June2022. Key search words included but were not limited tothe following: acute limb ischemia, angioplasty, ankle-
brachial index, anticoagulation, antiplatelet therapy,antithrombotic therapy, aty pical leg symptoms, blood
pressure lowering, bypass graft/bypass grafting/surgical
bypass, cilostazol, claudication/intermittent claudication,critical limb ischemia/chronic limb-threatening ischemia,diabetes, diagnostic testing, endovascular therapy, exerciserehabilitation/exercise therapy/exercise training/super-vised exercise, foot care, hybrid approach, lipid lowering,lower extremity/foot wound/ulcer, medical management,open revascularization, open surgery, percutaneous ther-
apy, peripheral artery disease/peripheral arterial disease/
peripheral vascular disease/lower extremity arterial dis-ease, smoking/smoking cessat ion, statin, stenting, throm-
bolysis, and vascular surgery. Additional relevant studies,
published through May 2023 during the peer review pro-cess, were also considered by the writing committee andadded to the evidence tables when appropriate. The ﬁnal
evidence tables are included in the Online Data
Supplement and summarize the evidence used by the
writing committee to formulate recommendations. Ref-erences selected and published in the present documentare intended to be representative and not all-inclusive.
1.2. Organization of the Writing Committee
The writing committee consiste d of clinicians, including
general and interventional cardiologists, interventionalradiologists, vascular medicine specialists, vascular sur-
geons, a vascular nurse, a cardiovascular nurse practi-tioner, wound care experts, an exercise physiologist, apodiatrist, lay stakeholder representatives, as well asclinical researchers in the ﬁeld of vascular disease. The
writing committee included representatives from the
ACC, AHA, American Association of Cardiovascular andPulmonary Rehabilitation (AACVPR), American PodiatricMedical Association (APMA), Association of Black Cardi-ologists (ABC), Society for Cardiovascular Angiographyand Interventions (SCAI), So ciety for Vascular Medicine
(SVM), Society for Vascular Nursing (SVN), Society forVascular Surgery (SVS), Society of Interventional Radi-
ology (SIR), and Vascular & Endovascular Surgery Society
(VESS). Appendix 1 of the current document lists writing
committee members ’comprehensive and relevant RWI.
On April 6, 2023, a writing committee member dis-
closed their participation on an industry board of di-rectors. When this was reviewed using speci ﬁcA H A / A C C
RWI policy for guidelines, performance measures, anddata standards, it was not considered to represent a
nonpermissible relationsh ip with industry under the
policy. However, the member stepped down as an authorof the guideline, and the AHA/ACC RWI policy was revisedto include service on the board of directors for industry asa nonpermissible relationship. In accordance with theAHA/ACC RWI policy, the member did not draft clinicalpractice recommendations or vote to approve or rejectrecommendations where their RWI applied. The member
stepped down before the guideline writing committee
reviewed and approved the manuscript for submission tot h eJ o i n tC o m m i t t e e ,t h eA H AS c i e n c eA d v i s o r ya n dCoordinating Committee, the AHA Executive Committee,the ACC Clinical Policy and Approval Committee, the ACCScience and Quality Committee, and the collaboratingorganizations for consideration of endorsement.
1.3. Document Review and Approval
The Joint Committee appoin ted a peer review committee
to review the document. The peer review committee
comprised individuals nominated by the ACC, AHA, andthe collaborating organizations. Reviewers ’RWI infor-
mation was distributed to the writing committee and ispublished in this document ( Appendix 2 ).
This document was approved for publication by the
governing bodies of the ACC and the AHA and wasendorsed by the AACVPR, AP M A ,A B C ,S C A I ,S V M ,S V N ,
SVS, SIR, and VESS.
1.4. Scope of the Guideline
Lower extremity peripheral artery disease (PAD) is a
common CVD that is estimated to affect 10 to 12 millionindividuals in the United States who are >40 years of age
and is associated with signi ﬁcant morbidity, mortality,Gornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042502

and QOL impairment.1It has been estimated that at least
113 million people and perhaps as many as 236 million
people worldwide have PAD, although prevalence esti-mates vary considerably.
2-4The purpose of this document
is to provide a contemporary guideline for the diagnosisand management of patients with lower extremity PAD.This document supersedes recommendations in the “2016
AHA/ACC Guideline on the Man agement of Patients WithLower Extremity Peripheral Artery Disease. ”
5The scope
of this guideline is limited to atherosclerotic and throm-
botic disease of the lower extremity arteries (PAD) andincludes disease of the aortoiliac, femoropopliteal, andinfrapopliteal arterial segm ents. It does not address other
nonatherosclerotic causes of lower extremity arterialdisease, such as vasculitis, ﬁbromuscular dysplasia,
physiological entrapment syndromes, cystic adventitialTABLE 1 Associated Guidelines and Statements
Title Organization(s) Publication Year (Reference)
AHA/ACC GuidelinesPerioperative cardiovascular evaluation and management of patients undergoing
noncardiac surgeryACC/AHA 2014
6
Focused update on duration of dual antiplatelet therapy in patients with coronary
artery diseaseACC/AHA 20167
Prevention, detection, evaluation, and management of high blood pressure
in adultsACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/ ACPM/AGS/APhA/
ASH/ASPC/NMA/PCNA20178
Management of blood cholesterol AHA/ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/ADA/
ADA/AGS/APhA/ASPC/NLA/PCNA20189
Prevention of stroke in patients with stroke and transient ischemic attack AHA/ASA 202110
Management of patients with chronic coronary disease AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA 202311
Scienti ﬁc Statements, Policy Statements, and Other Societal Guidelines
Inﬂuenza vaccination as secondary prevention for cardiovascular disease AHA/ACC 200612
Measurement and interpretation of the ankle-brachial index AHA 201213
Aorto-iliac arterial intervention appropriate use SCAI 201414
Lower extremity threatened limb classi ﬁcation system SVS 201415
Atherosclerotic occlusive disease of the lower extremities: management of
asymptomatic disease and claudicationSVS 201516
Prevention of cardiovascular disease in adults with type 2 diabetes in light of
recent evidenceAHA/ADA 201517
Decision pathway on tobacco cessation treatment ACC 201818
Optimal exercise programs for patients with PAD AHA 201919
Management of chronic limb-threatening ischemia SVS/ESVS/WFVS 201920
Implementation of supervised exercise therapy for patients with symptomatic PAD AHA 201921
Perfusion assessment in critical limb ischemia: principles for understanding and
the development of evidence and evaluation of devicesAHA 201922
Peripheral artery intervention ACC/AHA/SCAI/SIR/SVM 201923
Device selection in aorto-iliac arterial interventions SCAI 202024
Reducing nontraumatic lower-extremity amputations by 20% by 2030: time to
get to our feetAHA 202125
Advancing PAD quality of care and outcomes throughout patient-reported health
status assessmentAHA 202226
An overview of telehealth in the management of cardiovascular disease AHA 202227
Introduction and methodology: standards of care in diabetes ADA 202228
Management of intermittent claudication SVS 202229
Competencies for endovascular specialists providing CLTI care SCAI/ACR/APMA/SVCS/SIR/SVM/SVS/VESS 202230
Health disparities in PAD AHA 202331
AACVPR indicates American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation; AAPA, American Academy of Physician Assistants; ABC, Asso ciation of Black Cardiologists;
ACC, American College of Cardiology; ACPM, American College of Preventive Medicine; ACR, American College of Radiology; ADA, American Diabetes Ass ociation; AGS, American
Geriatrics Society; AHA, American Heart Association; APhA, American Pharmacists Association; APMA, American Podiatric Medical Association; ASH , American Society of Hypertension;
ASPC, American Society for Preventive Cardiology; CLTI, chronic limb-threatening ischemia; ESVS, European Society for Vascular Surgery; NLA, Nat ional Lipid Association; NMA,
National Medical Association; PAD, peripheral artery disease; SCAI, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions; SCVS, Society for Clinical Vascular Surgery; SIR, Society of
Interventional Radiology; SVM, Society for Vascular Medicine; SVS, Society for Vascular Surgery; PCNA, Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Associa tion; VESS, Vascular & Endovascular
Surgical Society; and WFVS, World Federation of Vascular Societies.JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2503

TABLE 2 Deﬁnitions of PAD Key Terms
Term Deﬁnition
ALI Acute ( #2 wk)32,33hypoperfusion of the limb that may be characterized by: pain, pallor, pulselessness, poikilothermia, paresthesias, and/or
paralysis.
ALI is further classi ﬁed according to the Rutherford classi ﬁcation system ( Table 4 ).34,35
Anatomic level36Anatomic subsets to localize disease in the lower extremity. Patients with PAD can have multilevel arterial disease across multiple segments.
nAortoiliac —Includes infrarenal abdominal aorta, common iliac, and external and internal iliac arteries.
nFemoropopliteal —Includes common femoral, profunda femoris, super ﬁcial femoral, and popliteal arteries.
nInfrapopliteal —Includes tibial-peroneal trunk, anterior tibial artery, posterior tibial artery, peroneal artery, plantar pedal loop,
and pedal vessels (common plantar, medial plantar, and lateral plantar arteries).
Angiosome-based blood ﬂow37Uninterrupted arterial ﬂow to the anatomic territory of a source artery in the skin and deep tissues. In the context of PAD, the angiosome
refers to the skin region and underlying tissue, generally with a wound, supplied by a speci ﬁc infrapopliteal artery.37
Claudication Fatigue, cramping, aching, pain, or other discomfort of vascular origin in the muscles of the lower extremities that is consistently in duced by
walking and consistently relieved by rest (usually within approximately 10 min). Claudication that limits functional status is known as
functionally limiting claudication. Claudication is recognized as a manifestation of chronic symptomatic PAD (see Section 2.1 ,
“Recognizing Clinical Subsets of PAD ”).
CLTI A condition characterized by chronic ( >2 wk) ischemic rest pain, nonhealing wounds and ulcers, or gangrene attributable to objectively
proven arterial occlusive disease.32Current nomenclature has evolved from the previous commonly used term of CLI to re ﬂect the chronic
nature of this condition and its potentially limb-threatening nature with associated risk for amputation and to distinguish it from ALI.
Endovascular revascularization Catheter-based revascularization procedures employing modalities such as percutaneous transluminal (balloon ) angioplasty, drug-coated
balloon angioplasty, stenting (bare-metal, drug-coated, or covered), and atherectomy.
Functional status Patient ’s ability to meet basic needs, ful ﬁll usual roles, and maintain health and well-being (activities of daily living). Walking ability/
performance and mobility are components of functional status.
Hybrid revascularization Approach to revascularization that includes endovascular and surgical components either concomitantly or in a staged ma nner.
In-line (pulsatile) blood ﬂow Uninterrupted arterial ﬂow via named infrapopliteal arteries to the foot.
Inﬂow vs out ﬂow In ﬂow refers to arteries proximal to the super ﬁcial femoral artery (aortoiliac, common femoral arteries). Out ﬂow refers to arteries distal to
the super ﬁcial femoral artery (popliteal and infrapopliteal arteries).
MACE Variably de ﬁned but usually includes death (all-cause or cardiovascular), MI, acute coronary syndrome (acute MI, unstable angina), and
stroke. May also include heart failure, rehospitalization for cardiovascular causes, and other cardiovascular endpoints.
MALE Variably de ﬁned but usually includes major amputation and endovascular or surgical lower-extremity revascularization (initial or
reintervention). May also include ALI.38,39
Multispecialty care team for PAD nA team of professionals representing different specialties and disciplines to assist in the evaluation and management of the
patient with PAD and especially CLTI.
nFor the care of patients with CLTI, the care team should include i ndividuals who are skilled in endovascular revascularization,
surgical revascularization, wound-healing therapies and foot surgery, and medical evaluation and care.
nTable 15 includes the list of multispecialty care team members.
nPatients and family members collaborate with the m ultispecialty care team for management of CLTI.
Regions of the foot nForefoot —Extends from the tarsometatarsal joint and incorporates the phalanges, metatarsal, and sesamoid bones.
nMidfoot —Begins at the transverse tarsal joint and extends to the tarso metatarsal joint, incorporating the navicular, cuboid, and
cuneiform bones.
nHindfoot —Begins at the ankle joint and ends at the transverse tarsa l joint, incorporating the calcaneus and talus bones.
Structured community-based
exercise programA structured exercise program that takes place in the personal setting of the patient (eg, home, surrounding neighborhood, ﬁtness facility).
The program is self-directed with as-needed guidance of health care professionals who prescribe a structured exercise regimen similar to
that performed in a supervised program setting. Community-based programs may incorporate behavioral change techniques, delivered by
in-person or virtual health coaching or the use of activity monitors. Table 14 provides more detail regarding this form of structured
exercise.
Structured exercise program An exercise program planned by a quali ﬁed health care professional that provides recommendations for exercise training with a goal of
improving functional status over time. The program provides individualized recommendations for frequency, intensity, time, and type ofexercise.
Supervised exercise therapy A supervised, structured exercise program that takes place in a hospital or outpatient facility that is directly superv ised by a physician or
advanced practice provider and most often implemented by a clinical exercise physiologist or nurse. Table 14 includes more detail
regarding this form of structured exercise.
Surgical revascularization Surgical procedures that may involve endarterectomy to remove plaque, thrombectomy, or bypass surgery to reconstruct arterial blood ﬂow.
Thrombolysis Administration of thrombolytic agents, generally through a catheter placed directly within an area of thrombus in an artery.Tissue loss
nMinor —Nonhealing ulcer, focal gangrene.
nMajor —Tissue loss extending above the tr ansmetatarsal level; functional foot no longer salvageable.34
WIfI nA clinical staging system for patients wit h CLTI that incorporates the wound extent, degree of ischemia, and severity of foot
infection.15
nWIfI class correlates with CLTI outcomes, including time to w ound healing, amputation rate, and amputation-free survival.40-43
ALI indicates acute limb ischemia; CLTI, chronic limb-threatening ischemia; MACE, major adverse cardiovascular events; MALE, major adverse limb e vents; MI, myocardial infarction; PAD, pe-
ripheral artery disease; and WIfI, wound, ischemia, foot infection.Gornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042504

disease, and vascular trauma, and does not address iso-
lated small vessel arterial disease/microangiopathy. Thisdocument does not address arterial disease in the pedi-
atric population.
In developing the “2024 ACC/AHA/AACVPR/APMA/
ABC/SCAI/SVM/SVN/SVS/SIR/VESS Guideline for theManagement of Lower Extremity Peripheral Artery Dis-ease, ”the writing committee reviewed the evidence to
support recommendations in the relevant guidelinesnoted in Table 1 and af ﬁrmed the ongoing validity of the
related recommendations, t hus obviating the need to
repeat existing guideline recommendations in the currentguideline. Table 2 includes de ﬁnitions for PAD key terms
used throughout the guideline.
1.5. Class of Recommendations and Level of Evidence
The Class of Recommendation (COR) indicates the
strength of recommendation, encompassing the esti-mated magnitude and certainty of bene ﬁt in proportion to
risk. The Level of Evidence (LOE) rates the quality ofscienti ﬁc evidence supporting the intervention on the
basis of the type, quantity, and consistency of data fromclinical trials and other sources ( Table 3 ).
1TABLE 3Applying American College of Cardiology/American Heart A ssociation Class of Recommendation and Level of Evidence to
Clinical Strategies, Interventions, Treatments, or Di agnostic Testing in Patient Care* (Updated May 2019)
JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2505

1.6. Abbreviations
2. CLINICAL ASSESSMENT FOR PAD
Clinical assessment is a central component of evaluation
for PAD. Recognition of patterns (clinical subsets) ofclinical presentation of PAD wil l direct clinical evaluation,diagnostic testing, and treatment, as well as determine
the urgency of care. The clinical assessment for PAD in-
cludes the history and physical examination, consider-ation of differential diagnoses, and is performed beforediagnostic testing for PAD (see Section 3 ,“Diagnostic
Testing for PAD ”).
2.1. Recognizing Clinical Subsets of PAD
The clinical presentation of patients with objectively
conﬁrmed PAD can be categorized into 4 clinical subsets:
asymptomatic PAD, chronic symptomatic PAD, chroniclimb-threatening ischemia (CLTI), and acute limbischemia (ALI) ( Figure 1 ). Patients with PAD may develop
different symptoms over time and may move into and out
of different subsets during their disease process, such as
deterioration of chronic symptomatic PAD to CLTI or ALIor improvement of symptoms after treatment. The char-acteristics of each clinical subset of PAD are described inTable 4 .Abbreviation Meaning/Phrase
6MWT 6-minute walk testABI ankle-brachial index
ACE angiotensin-converting enzyme
ALI acute limb ischemiaCAD coronary artery diseaseCKD chronic kidney diseaseCLTI chronic limb-threatening ischemiaCOVID-19 coronavirus disease 2019
CTA computed tomography angiography
CVD cardiovascular diseaseESKD end-stage kidney diseaseGDMT guideline-directed management and therapyLDL-C low-density lipoprotein cholesterol
MACE major adverse cardiovascular events
MALE major adverse limb eventsMI myocardial infarctionMRA magnetic resonance angiographyNPWT negative pressure wound therapyPAD peripheral artery disease
PTA percutaneous transluminal angioplasty
PVR pulse volume recordingsQOL quality of lifeRCT randomized controlled trialSARS-CoV-2 severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus-2
SBP systolic blood pressure
SET supervised exercise therapySPP skin perfusion pressureTBI toe-brachial indexTcPO
2 transcutaneous oxygen pressure
WIfI wound, ischemia, and foot infectionFIGURE 1 Clinical Subsets of PAD
ALI indicates acute limb ischemia; CLTI, chronic limb-threatening
ischemia; and PAD, peripheral artery disease.Gornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042506

TABLE 4 Clinical Subsets of Patients With PAD
Clinical Subset Description/Characterization
Asymptomatic PAD (may have functional impairment) Depending on the population assessed and method of assessment, 20%-59%1-4of patients with
objectively proven PAD report no leg symptoms.
Patients classi ﬁed as having asymptomatic PAD may self-limit and adapt their activity to remain below
their ischemic threshold to avoid leg pain.
A signi ﬁcant percentage of patients with asymptomatic PAD who report no exertional leg symptoms
develop symptoms during an objective walking test.5
The prevalence of asymptomatic PAD varies depending on whether patients are recruited from a
primary care or community setting (lower %) vs a vascular laboratory (higher %).3
Patients with PAD who are asymptomatic have functional impairment comparable to patients with
claudication.1,6,7
Associated with increased risk of MACE, including mortality.8,9
Chronic symptomatic PAD (includes claudication and other
ischemia-related exertional leg symptoms)Most common clinically evident subset of PAD; patients report claudication or other nonjoint-related
exertional leg symptoms that can limit walking performance.
Exertional leg symptoms (typical claudication or other) reported in up to 80% of patients with
objectively proven PAD, depending on case series.1-3
Includes ischemia-related exertional leg symptoms, not present at rest, generally increasing with
progressive exercise intensity and quickly relieved by rest (within 10 min).10
Typical claudication symptoms may be described as a pain, aching, cramping, or tired/fatigued
feeling located in the buttocks, thigh, calf, or foot that occurs consistently during walking, does not
start at rest, does not improve during walking, and is usually relieved within approximately 10 min
of rest.1-3,11Leg symptom descriptors also include tingling, numbness, burning, throbbing, or
shooting.12-15
For some patients, exertional leg symptoms due to PAD are not typical of claudication because they
may not limit walking or may take >10 min to resolve after rest.11
Chronic symptomatic PAD is associated with signi ﬁcant functional (walking) impairment, regardless of
whether symptoms are typical of claudication.1,6,7
CLTI Severe clinical subset of PAD.
Among patients with known PAD, incidence of CLTI estimated to be between 11% and 20%.16-18
Manifests as ischemic rest pain, nonhealing wounds/ulcers, or gangrene with symptoms present for
>2 wk.19
Responsible for most major and minor limb amputations related to PAD.16,17
Historically estimated 1-y mortality rate of 25%-35% and 1-y rate of amputation up to 30% among
patients presenting with CLTI.20,21
Lower rates of mortality and amputation reported in a recent RCT of patients with CLTI undergoing
revascularization.22
Ischemic rest pain often affects the forefoot and is worsened with limb elevation and relieved by
dependency.
Among vascular specialists, the Fontaine23and Rutherford24classi ﬁcation systems are most commonly
used to categorize severity of CLTI.
The WIfI classi ﬁcation estimates risk of lower extremity amputation according to wound extent, severity
of ischemia, and presence of foot infection and has been shown to correlate with clinical
outcomes.19,25-28
ALI Severe clinical subset of PAD.
In a contemporary RCT of patients with symptomatic PAD who were observed for a mean of 30 mo, the
incidence of ALI was 1.7%, or 0.8/100 patient-y.29Previous lower extremity revascularization, atrial
ﬁbrillation, lower ABI values associated with increased risk of ALI in this population.
Sudden decrease in arterial perfusion of the leg that threatens the viability of the limb.
Acute clinical symptoms ( <2 wk duration) include pain, pallor, pulselessness, poikilothermia (coolness),
paresthesias, and potential for paralysis.20,24,30
Causes of ALI include embolism, thrombosis within native artery or at site of previous revascularization
(graft or stent), trauma, peripheral aneurysm with distal embolization, or thrombosis ( Table 20 ).
Timing of presentation may vary depending on the underlying etiology.20
The status of the leg in ALI is further classi ﬁed according to the Rutherford classi ﬁcation system.20,24,30
Class I. Viable (limb not immediately threatened) —No sensory loss; no motor loss; audible arterial and
venous Doppler signals.
Class IIa. Salvageable/marginally threatened (limb salvageable if promptly treated) —Mild-to-moderate
sensory loss (limited to toes) but no motor loss, often inaudible arterial Doppler but audible venous
Doppler signals.
Class IIb. Salvageable/immediately threatened (limb salvageable if urgently treated) —Sensory loss
involving more than the toes; mild-moderate motor weakness. Inaudible arterial but audible venousDoppler signals.
Class III. Irreversible (major tissue loss or permanent nerve damage inevitable) —Complete sensory loss
(anesthetic); complete loss of motor function (paralysis); inaudible arterial and venous Doppler
signals.
ALI indicates acute limb ischemia; CLTI, chronic limb-threatening ischemia; PAD, peripheral artery disease; RCT, randomized controlled trial; an d WIfI, wound, ischemia, and foot
infection.JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2507

2.2. History and Physical Examination to Assess for PAD
Synopsis
Clinical assessment for PAD begins with recognition of
risk factors for PAD to assist in identi ﬁcation of patients at
risk. Risk factors for atherosclerosis as well as presence of
atherosclerotic disease in other vascular areas areimportant risk features. The h istory and physical exami-
nation are important to identify patients at increased riskof PAD, assess for lower extremity symptoms, and assessfor pulse de ﬁcits and other signs of PAD, including lower
extremity wounds. Suggestive clinical history or thepresence of any abnormal physical examination ﬁnding
concerning for PAD requires prompt evaluation with the
ankle-brachial index (ABI) to establish the diagnosis ofPAD (see Section 3 ,“Diagnostic Testing for PAD ”). For
patients in whom the diagnosis of PAD has been estab-l i s h e d ,l o n g i t u d i n a lc a r ei n c ludes periodic reassessment
of lower extremity symptoms, assessment of pulses, andfoot inspection and preventive care (see Section 5.8 ,
“Preventive Foot Care for PAD ”and Section 12 ,“Longi-
tudinal Follow-Up of PAD ”).
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Patients at risk for PAD are identi ﬁed based on de-
mographic features, cardiova scular risk factors, or thepresence of atherosclerotic vascular disease in other
vascular beds ( Table 5 ). Black race is associated with
increased risk for PAD, even after adjustment for con-ventional risk factors, and is also associated with majoradverse cardiovascular events (MACE) and majoradverse limb events (MALE; see Section 4.1 ,“Ampli-
ﬁers of Cardiovascular and Limb-Related Risk in Pa-
tients With PAD ”andSection 4.2 ,“Health Disparities in
PAD ”).
9,10The clinical presentation of PAD varies andRecommendations for History and Physical Examination to Assess for PAD
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In patients at increased risk of PAD ( Table 5 ), a comprehensive medical history and review of symptoms to
assess for exertional leg symptoms, lower extremity rest pain, and lower extremity wounds or other
ischemic skin changes should be performed.1-4
1 B-NR2. In patients at increased risk of PAD ( Table 5 ), a comprehensive vascular examination and inspection of the
legs and feet should be performed regularly ( Table 6 ).2,5-8
TABLE 5 Patients at Increased Risk for PAD
nAge$65 y
nAge 50-64 y, with risk factors for athe rosclerosis (eg, diabetes, history
of smoking, dyslipidemia, hypertension), chronic kidney disease, or
family history of PAD13
nAge<50 y, with diabetes and 1 additional risk factor for atherosclerosis
nIndividuals with known atherosclerotic disease in another vascular bed
(eg, coronary, carotid, subclavian, re nal, mesenteric artery stenosis, or
AAA)
Modiﬁed with permission from Gerhard-Herman et al.14Copyright 2017 American Heart
Association, Inc., and American College of Cardiology Foundation.
AAA indicates abdominal aortic aneurysm; and PAD, peripheral artery disease.TABLE 6History and Physical Examination Findings
Suggestive of PAD
History
nClaudication
nPain type: Aching, burning, cramping, discomfort, or fatigue
nLocation: Buttock, thigh, calf, or ankle
nOnset/offset: Distance, exercise, uphill, how long for relief after
rest (typically <10 min for typical claudication)
nOther nonjoint-related exertiona l lower extremity symptoms (not
typical of claudication) or symptoms of impaired walking function
nLower extremity muscular discomfort associated with walking that
requires >1 0m i nr e s tt or e s o l v e
nLeg weakness, numbness, or fatigue during walking without pain
nIschemic rest pain
nHistory of nonhealing or slow-healing lower extremity wound
nErectile dysfunction
Physical Examination
nAbnormal lower extremity pulse palpation (femoral, popliteal, dorsalis
pedis, or posterior tibial arteries)
nVascular bruit (eg, epigastric, periumbilical, groin)
nNonhealing lower extremity wound
nLower extremity gangrene
nOther physical ﬁndings suggestive of ischemia (eg, asymmetric hair
growth, nail bed changes, calf muscle atrophy, or elevation pallor/
dependent rubor)
Modiﬁed with permission from Gerhard-Herman et al.14Copyright 2017 American Heart
Association, Inc., and American College of Cardiology Foundation.
PAD indicates peripheral artery disease.Gornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042508

can be classi ﬁed into clinical subsets ( Table 4 ). It is
estimated that only one-third of patients with PADpresent with symptoms of typical claudication, whilemost patients with PAD present with other exertionalleg symptoms not typical of claudication.
1,4All patients
with chronic symptomatic PAD, including those withatypical symptoms, have walking impairment.
4Thus,
careful consideration of all exertional leg symptoms
with a meticulous clinical history assessment that
highlights site, quality, exacerbating factors, relievingfactors, timing, and progression of leg symptoms is key(Table 6 ).
11The differential diagnosis of PAD is broad,
a n dl e gs y m p t o m sw i t he x e r t i o nm a yb ed u et om u l t i -ple other causes ( Table 7 ). The approach to diagnostic
testing for patients with suspected PAD is discussed inSection 3 ,“Diagnostic Testing for PAD. ”
2. Patients at increased risk of PAD require a thorough
vascular examination with a focus on the lowerextremities. To appropriately accomplish this, all lower
extremity garments, including shoes and socks, shouldbe removed. Lower extremity pulses (femoral, popli-teal, dorsalis pedis, and posterior tibial arteries) aree v a l u a t e dw i t hp a l p a t i o na n dr a t e da sf o l l o w s :0 ,a b -sent; 1, diminished; 2, normal; or 3, bounding ( Table 6 ).
Reproducibility of pulse assessment is more accuratefor detection of normal versus absent pulse than for
normal versus diminished pulse.
5,11Presence of all 4
(right and left) posterior tibial and dorsalis pedis pulseson palpation is associated with low likelihood of PAD.
12
Evaluating for both abdominal and femoral bruits mayalso be useful to identify signs of PAD. Last, otherﬁndings, such as elevation pallor/dependent rubor,
asymmetric hair growth, and calf muscle atrophy, maybe suggestive of PAD.
5,8,11Additional evaluation for
peripheral neuropathy should be considered among
patients with diabetes.TABLE 7 Alternative Diagnosis for Leg Pain or Claudication Not Related to PAD (Normal Physiological Testing)
Condition Location Characteristic Effect of Exercise Effect of Rest Effect of Position Other Characteristics
Hip arthritis Lateral hip, thigh Aching discomfort After variable degree of
exerciseNot quickly relieved Improved when not
bearing weightSymptoms variable;
history of
degenerative arthritis
Foot/ankle arthritis Ankle, foot, arch Aching pain After variable degree of
exercise; may also be
present at restNot quickly relieved May be relieved by
not bearing
weightSymptoms variable
Nerve root
compressionRadiates down
legSharp lancinating
painInduced by sitting,
standing, or walking
(variable)Often present at rest Improved by change
in positionHistory of back problems;
worse with sitting;
relief when supine or
standing
Spinal stenosis (eg,
degenerative disc
disease or tumor)Often bilateral
buttocks,
posterior legPain and weakness May mimic claudication Variable relief but
can take a long
time to recoverRelief by lumbar
spine ﬂexionWorse with standing and
extending spine
Symptomatic
popliteal
(Baker ’s) cystBehind knee,
down calfSwelling, tenderness With exercise Also present at rest None Not intermittent
Venous claudication Entire leg, worse
in calfTight, bursting pain After walking Subsides slowly Relief speeded by leg
elevationHistory of iliofemoral
deep vein thrombosis;
edema; signs of
venous stasis
Chronic compartment
syndromeCalf muscles Tight, bursting pain After strenuous exercise
(jogging)Subsides very slowly Relief with rest Typically heavy muscled
athletes
Modiﬁed from Norgren et al.15Copyright 2007, with permission from Elsevier.
PAD indicates peripheral artery disease.JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2509

3. DIAGNOSTIC TESTING FOR PAD
Diagnostic testing for suspected PAD requires a multi-
faceted approach that incorporates history and physicalexamination, ABI, and additional physiological testing, aswell as noninvasive and potentially invasive (angiog-raphy) imaging ( Figure 2 ). Understanding the indications
for the use of these testing modalities can help to ef ﬁ-
ciently direct resources such as revascularization to pa-
tients who may be in urgent need of therapy. Further, andmore commonly, understanding the indications for the
use of these testing modalit ies can help to avoid unnec-
essary testing for patients for whom further delineation ofarterial anatomy will not impact plans for therapy (eg, forpatients with asymptomatic PAD or chronic symptomatic
PAD who are treated with medical therapy and structured
exercise).
3.1. Resting ABI and Additional Physiological Testing
Recommendations for Resting ABI and A dditional Physiological Testing
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
RESTING ABI
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In patients with history or physical examination ﬁndings suggestive of PAD ( Table 6 ), the resting ABI, with
or without ankle pulse volume recordings (PVR) and/ or Doppler waveforms, is recommended to establish
the diagnosis.1,2
1 B-NR2. The resting ABI should be reported as abnormal (ABI £0.90), borderline (ABI 0.91-0.99), normal (ABI
1.00-1.40), or noncompressible (ABI >1.40).3
2a B-NR3. In patients at increased risk of PAD ( Table 5 ), screening for PAD with the resting ABI, with or without
ankle PVR and/or Doppler waveforms, is reasonable.4-9
3: No Bene ﬁt B-NR4. In patients not at increased risk of PAD ( Table 5 ) and without history or physical examination ﬁndings
suggestive of PAD ( Table 6 ), screening for PAD with the ABI is not recommended.10,11
Exercise ABI and Additional Physiological Testing
1 B-NR5. In patients with suspected PAD, toe pressure/toe-brachial index (TBI) with waveforms should be per-
formed when the resting ABI is >1.40 (noncompressible).12-17
1 B-NR6. Patients with suspected chronic symptomatic PAD (ie, exertional nonjoint-related leg symptoms) and
normal or borderline resting ABI ( >0.90 and £1.40, respectively) should undergo exercise treadmill ABI
testing to evaluate for PAD.18,19
2a B-NR7. In patients with PAD and an abnormal resting ABI ( £0.90), the exercise treadmill ABI test can be useful to
objectively assess the functional status and walking performance.20-25
2a C-LD8. In patients with chronic symptomatic PAD, it is re asonable to perform segmental leg pressures with PVR
and/or Doppler waveforms in addition to the resting ABI to help delineate the anatomic level of PAD.26,27
2a B-NR9. In patients with suspected CLTI, it is reasonable to u se toe pressure/TBI with waveforms, transcutaneous
oxygen pressure (TcPO 2), and/or skin perfusion pressure (SPP) in addition to ABI for assessment of
arterial perfusion and to estab lish the diagnosis of CLTI.13,28-37
2a B-NR10. In patients with CLTI with nonhealing wounds or gan grene, it can be useful to use toe pressure/TBI with
waveforms, TcPO 2, SPP, and/or other local perfusion measur es to determine the likelihood of wound
healing without or after revascularization.13,14,28,33-36 ,38
Synopsis
After the history and physical examination identify
patients at risk for PAD and with history of physical ex-
amination symptoms or signs of PAD, diagnostic testing toestablish the diagnosis of PAD is performed ( Figure 2 ). The
ABI, a simple, noninvasive physiological test, remains the
cornerstone for initial diagnosis of PAD, although it has
multiple limitations, particularly in the setting of diabetesGornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042510

FIGURE 2 Algorithm for Diagnostic Testing for PAD
*If not already performed. Colors correspond to Table 3 . ABI indicates ankle-brachial index; CLTI, chronic limb-threatening ischemia; CTA, computed tomography
angiography; GDMT, guideline-directed management and therapy; MRA, magnetic resonance angiography; PAD, peripheral artery disease; PVR, pulse v olume recording,
SPP, skin perfusion pressure; TBI, toe-brachial index; and TcPO 2, transcutaneous oxygen pressure.JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2511

and chronic kidney disease (CKD), which are associated
with noncompressible vessels, and for the assessment ofCLTI.
39,40T h eA B Im a yb ep e r f o r m e di nav a s c u l a rl a b o -
ratory or in an of ﬁce-based setting using a blood pressure
cuff and a Doppler device. Continuous-wave Doppler
waveforms or plethysmographic tracings (ie, PVR) at the
ankle are performed. Beyond the ABI, additional physio-logical testing is performed in the evaluation of PAD tosupplement the ABI and inclu des exercise ABI testing,
segmental pressures, leg pressures and (PVR and/orDoppler) waveforms, toe pressure/TBI, and perfusionimaging. Imaging studies (see Section 3.2 ,“Imaging
for PAD ”) are performed when further de ﬁnition of
anatomy is required, such as to plan revascularization.
The diagnostic approach to ALI is discussed separately inSection 11 ,“Acute Limb Ischemia. ”
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. The resting ABI is measured in each leg using a blood
pressure cuff and a Doppler device to detect bloodﬂow and pressure in the pedal and the brachial ar-
teries.
3,41The ABI is the ratio of the higher systolic
pressure in the ipsilateral dorsalis pedis and posteriortibial arteries divided by the higher of the left andright brachial artery s ystolic pressures.
3,41In patients
with symptoms of PAD, the resting ABI has a sensi-tivity of 69% to 79% and a speci ﬁcity of 83% to 99%
compared with imaging studies showing signi ﬁcant
arterial stenoses, although the sensitivity is reduced
i nt h ep r e s e n c eo fd i a b e t e s .
1-3,42,43As an adjunct to
ABI, Doppler waveforms and/or plethysmographicPVR taken at the ankle can con ﬁrm concordance with
the presence and severity of PAD and suggest thepresence of noncompressible arteries in the setting ofdiscordance.
2. Standardized criteria for reporting the resting ABI
allow for comparison between and within patients
and from facility to facility and for changes in severity
of disease within the same patient over time. Thesecriteria for reporting ABI have been broadly adoptedinternationally.
3,41
3. The ABI test is noninvasive, is simple to perform, and
has minimal risks, making it suitable as a screeningtest for PAD among those at risk ( Table 5 ). Patients
with an abnormal ABI who are asymptomatic
(asymptomatic PAD) have poorer cardiovascular
morbidity and mortality outcomes than do patientswith normal ABI.
7-9,44-51Beyond risk strati ﬁcation,
detection of PAD has potential treatment implicationsfor asymptomatic PAD, including application of GDMT(see Section 5 ,“Medical Therapy and Preventive FootCare for the Patient With PAD ”). In an RCT of a
vascular screening program in Denmark that assessedABI, hypertension, and abdominal aortic aneurysmamong men 65 to 74 years of age, the vascularscreening program resulted in a small but statistically
signi ﬁcant reduction in the overall mortality rate
after a median of 4.4 years of follow-up.
52Because
3 screening tools were used, it is dif ﬁcult to determine
how much of the bene ﬁt was related to measuring the
ABI. A separate RCT, also conducted in Denmark, of amore extensive cardiovascular screening program inmen 65 to 74 years of age, that included ABI alongwith coronary and aortoiliac calcium CT assessment,
cardiac monitoring, and blood cholesterol and glucose
levels, did not ﬁnd a mortality bene ﬁt of the screening
program at a median of 5.6 years of follow-up.
53In
addition to increased cardiovascular risk, asymptom-atic patients with an abnormal resting ABI have apoorer functional status and a more rapid rate offunctional decline than do patients with a normalABI.
4,54-58Although physical activity has been shown
to be associated with improvement in functional sta-
tus in patients with asymptomatic PAD,59,60the
bene ﬁt of resting ABI testing to identify asymptomatic
patients who may bene ﬁt from structured exercise
programs remains to be determined.
4. The prevalence of PAD among individuals without
risk factors for atherosclerosis and who are <50
years of age is low. Data from population-based
cohort studies have shown a low prevalence
(approximately 1%) of abnormal resting ABI amongindividuals <50 years of age.
10,11In NHANES (Na-
tional Health and Nutrition Examination Survey),approximately 95% of participants with anabnormal resting ABI had at least 1 risk factor foratherosclerosis.
10The yield of ABI testing among
younger, asymptomatic individuals without risk
factors for atherosclerosis is low, and these patients
should not be routinely tested for PAD.10,11
5. Noncompressible tibial arteries occur frequently in
the setting of diabetes or CKD and may result in a
falsely elevated ABI of >1.4 even when signi ﬁcant PAD
is con ﬁrmed by imaging.15-17 ,39,40,61Digital arteries are
rarely noncompressible, and a TBI can be used toevaluate for PAD.
12-14T h eT B Ii st h er a t i oo ft h et o e
(ﬁrst digit) pressure divided by the higher of the left
and right brachial artery systolic pressures. A TBIof#0.70 is considered abnormal and allows for the
diagnosis of PAD in patients with an ABI >1.4 who
have history or physical examination ﬁndings sug-
gestive of PAD ( Table 6 ).
16,17Gornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042512

6. The exercise treadmill ABI is generally measured
within 1 and 5 minutes after exercise on a motorizedtreadmill using a Doppler device and a blood pressure
cuff. ABI measurements may be further repeated until
recovery to baseline. Exercise increases blood ﬂow
and the gradient across physiological stenoses to in-crease the sensitivity of detecting PAD.
19Although
evidence supporting the additional diagnostic valueof exercise ABI is limited, a retrospective case seriesshowed the highest sensitivity and speci ﬁcity for the
diagnosis of PAD in patients with resting ABI $0.90.
18
Various criteria for signi ﬁcant decrease in ABI with
exercise have been reported.18
7. In patients with objectively con ﬁrmed PAD and an
abnormal ABI ( #0.90), treadmill exercise ABI testing
can be used to objectively assess functional status andwalking performance, inc luding documentation of
time to onset of symptoms, nature of symptoms, andmaximal walking time, as well as postexercise ABI.
Among patients with chronic symptomatic PAD, this
exercise assessment can be used as a baseline mea-sure of functional status and for evaluation ofresponse to therapy, including medical therapy(see Section 5 ,“Medical Therapy and Preventive Foot
Care for Patients With PAD ”), structured exercise
therapy (see Section 6 ,“Exercise Therapy for PAD ”),
and revascularization (see Section 7 ,“Revasculariza-
tion for Asymptomatic PAD ”). Exercise ABI perfor-
mance is used as an outcome measure to evaluatetherapies for chronic symptomatic PAD in RCTs
22,25and
has been shown to correlate with subjective symptoms.
8. Segmental limb pressure measurements with PVR,
Doppler waveforms, or both are obtained in thevascular laboratory setting. Blood pressure gradients
between cuffs placed on the leg (either 3 or 4 cuffs
from thigh to ankle), along with corresponding qual-itative changes in the appearance of PVR or Dopplerwaveforms, are used to localize PAD anatomically (ie,aortoiliac, femoropopliteal, and/or infrapopliteal dis-ease), although the precise de ﬁnition of location,
severity, and characteristics of arterial lesions re-quires further imaging (see Section 3.2 ,“Imaging for
PAD ”).
26,27Segmental studies are particularly relevant
in clinical situations in which delineation ofanatomic level of PAD may impact the managementof the patient (eg, in considering patients forTABLE 8 Alternative Diagnoses for Nonhealing Lower Extremity Wou nds With Normal Physiological Testing (Not PAD Related)
Condition Location Characteristics and Causes
Autoimmune injury Toes, foot, leg nWith blisters (eg, pemphigoid, pemphigus, epidermolysis bullosa)
nWithout blisters (eg, dermatomyositis, lupus, scleroderma)
Infection Toes, foot, leg nBacterial (eg, Pseudomonas, necrotizing Streptococcus )
nFungal (eg, blastomycosis, Madura foot, chromomycosis)
nMycobacterial
nParasitic (eg, Chagas, leishmaniasis)
nViral (eg, herpes)
Inﬂammatory ulcer Toes, foot, leg nNecrobiosis lipoidica
nPyoderma gangrenosum
nGranuloma annulare
Local injury Toes, foot, leg nTrauma
nInsect or animal bite
nBurn
Malignancy Toes, foot, leg nPrimary skin malignancy
nMetastatic malignancy
nMalignant transformation of ulcer
Medication-related
ulcerToes, foot, leg nDrug reactions (eg, erythema multiforme)
nMedication direct toxicity (eg, doxorubicin, hydroxyurea, some tyrosine kinase inhibitors)
Neuropathic ulcer Pressure zones of foot nHyperkeratosis surrounds the ulcer
nDiabetes with peripheral neuropathy
nPeripheral neuropathy without diabetes
nLeprosy
Venous ulcer Distal leg, especially above medial
malleolusnDevelops in regions of skin changes due to chronic venous disease and local venous
hypertension
nTypically wet (ie, wound drainage) rather than dry lesion
PAD indicates peripheral artery disease. Modi ﬁed with permission from Gerhard-Herman et al.69Copyright 2017 American Heart Association, Inc., and American College of Cardiology
Foundation.JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2513

revascularization). Standardized nomenclature for
Doppler waveforms from lower extremity arteries hasrecently been proposed.
62
9. The ABI alone may be inadequate to assess patients
with suspected CLTI.28The ABI may be 0.90 to 1.40 in
nearly one-quarter of patients with CLTI, and 29% of
patients have an ABI between 0.70 and 1.40.28,29
Additionally, the concordance between ABI and toe
pressure/TBI among patients with CLTI is poor, withonly 58% of patients who meet the criteria forabnormal toe pressures presenting with abnormalABIs.
30AT B Io f #0.70 is considered abnormal and
allows for diagnosis of PAD, whereas absolute toe
pressures <30 mm Hg are re ﬂective of severe ischemia
and are associated with major amputation anddecreased likelihood of wound healing.
13,16,31,32In
addition to toe pressures and TBI, an abnormalcontinuous-wave Doppler or photoplethysmographicwaveform obtained from the base of the great toefurther supports the diagnosis of PAD in the patientwith suspected CLTI.
33TcPO 2and SPP are other
testing modalities that can be used for perfusion
assessment. A TcPO 2of>30 mm Hg or an SPP of >40
mm Hg can predict wound healing.34-37Perfusion
assessment measures (ie, TBI with waveforms, TcPO 2,
SPP) are obtained in a warm room to prevent arterialvasoconstriction in response to the cold. For patientswith nonhealing lower extremity wounds with normalperfusion assessment, alternative diagnoses should
be considered ( Table 8 ).
10. In patients with nonhealing wounds or gangrene in
whom the diagnosis of CLTI has been established,additional perfusion assessments including toe pres-
sure/TBI, TcPO
2, and SPP have shown the ability to
assess local perfusion and determine wound-healingpotential and risk for amputation.
32-35 ,37Laser
Doppler ﬂowmetry and laser speckle imaging are
emerging technologies with potential for assessingperfusion in limbs with wounds, but larger prospec-tive studies are required for their validation as usefulprimary perfusion assessment tools.
63,64Similarly,
pedal acceleration time has been correlated with the
ABI and clinical presentation of PAD, and improve-ment in the pedal acceleration time (180 ms) afterrevascularization in patients with CLTI has beenassociated with limb salvage in a single-centerstudy.
65,66Development of additional tools for
perfusion assessment and prediction of wound-healing potential in the setting of CLTI is an area of
ongoing investigation with new modalities, such as
spatial frequency domain imaging, currently underinvestigation.
63,67,68
3.2. Imaging for PAD
Recommendations for Imaging for PAD
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In patients with functionally limiting claudication with inadequate response to GDMT (including struc-
tured exercise) for whom revascular ization is being considered, duple x ultrasound, computed tomogra-
phy angiography (CTA), magnetic resonance angiography (MRA), or catheter angiography of the lowerextremities is useful for assessment of anatomy an d severity of disease and to determine potential
revascularization strategy.
1-4
1 B-NR2. In patients with CLTI, duplex ultrasound, CTA, MRA, or catheter angiography is useful to determine
revascularization strategy.1-3,5,6
2b C-EO3. In patients with suspected PAD (ie, potential signs and/or symptoms) with inconclusive ABI and physi-
ological testing, noninvasive imaging with du plex ultrasound, CTA, or MRA may be considered to
establish the diagnosis of PAD.
3: Harm B-NR4. In patients with a con ﬁrmed diagnosis of PAD in whom revascula rization is not being considered, CTA,
MRA, or catheter angiography should not be pe rformed solely for anatomic assessment.7-10Gornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042514

Synopsis
Arterial imaging studies ar e generally obtained when
revascularization is being considered but may also beused when there is clinical suspicion of PAD and the ABIand physiological tests are inconclusive ( Figure 2 ). Arte-
rial imaging can be accomplished by several modalities.
Duplex ultrasound is noninvasive and does not requirethe use of radiation or contrast to image arteries, althoughdedicated and trained technical and medical personnelare required to perform and interpret, along with dedi-cated time to image all of the arteries in the lower limbs.
4
CTA and MRA are noninvasive cross-sectional imagingmodalities that provide greater detail of the anatomy and
severity of PAD and are less personnel-dependent; how-
ever, they are associated with potential risks related tocontrast or (in the case of CTA) radiation exposure.
7-10
Catheter angiography is associated with risks of radia-tion exposure and contrast as well as arterial injury andbleeding from invasive catheter placement, and it isusually restricted to the more severe presentations of PADwhere revascularization is being considered and the
bene ﬁts outweigh the risks of these complications.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Preprocedural imaging is used to plan a potential
revascularization strategy for patients with function-ally limiting claudication for whom response to GDMT(including structured exercise) is inadequate andrevascularization is being considered. Such imaging
provides an assessment of vascular access sites, loca-
tion of stenotic lesions or occlusions, and assessmentof the feasibility of and modality for revascularization.D u p l e xu l t r a s o u n d ,C T A ,a n dM R Ah a v eg o o ds e n s i -tivity and speci ﬁcity for the detection of PAD stenotic
and/or occlusive lesions compared with catheter-basedangiography,
1-4and the choice of imaging modality is
individualized based on patient and imaging modality-
based factors as well as local availability of resources.
Duplex ultrasound is technologist-dependent, and CTAand MRA have improved spatial resolution over duplexultrasound; however, CTA is limited by the need foriodinated contrast
7and radiation exposure. Contrast-
enhanced MRA uses gadolinium, certain formulationsof which are contraindicated in patients with severerenal dysfunction secondary to the risk for nephro-
genic systemic sclerosis.
11,12Noncontrast MRA se-
quences that provide high spatial resolution and theability to visualize infrapopliteal and pedal vesselshave emerged as a promising imaging modality forimaging lesions associated with PAD.
13In certain clin-
ical scenarios, performanc e of noninvasive imaging
studies for anatomic assessment (ie, CTA, or MRA) maybe perceived to confer greater risk to the patient than
invasive angiography (eg, patients with advanced CKDfor whom contrast dose for invasive angiography
would be lower than that required for CTA). For suchpatients in whom revascularization is being planned,diagnostic catheter angiography followed by endovas-cular revascularization during the same session or in a
staged manner before the reva scularization procedure
can provide timely anatomic assessment and minimize
risk associated with other studies.
2. Timely diagnosis and treatment, including revascular-
ization, are essential to prevent tissue loss and pre-serve the limb in patients with CLTI (see Section 10 ,
“Management of CLTI ”). The imaging approach for
planning revascularization in patients with CLTI is
individualized based on patient-speci ﬁc and imaging
modality-based factors and local availability of re-sources. Noninvasive cross-sectional imaging (ie,duplex ultrasound, CTA, or MRA) is often obtained inplanning revascularization, and validation studiescomparing these modalities with catheter angiographyhave included patients with CLTI.
1-3,5,6However, for
some patients with CLTI, proceeding directly to inva-
sive catheter angiography followed by endovascular
revascularization during the same session avoids delayand can minimize potential risks (eg, additionaliodinated contrast exposure and radiation) associatedwith prerevascularization noninvasive imaging.
3. There are clinical situations in which a patient has
potential signs or symptoms of PAD but ABI andphysiological testing results are inconclusive. Addi-
tional noninvasive imaging may be considered to
establish the diagnosis of PAD and to determine atreatment strategy. This is particularly important for
patients with nonhealing wounds (ie, suspected CLTI)for whom noncompressible vessels may lead to non-diagnostic physiological testing. Further, in patientswith exertional leg symptoms who are unable toparticipate in physiological tests such as treadmill
testing, establishing the presence of PAD or the
severity of PAD may be dif ﬁcult. For these patients,
noninvasive imaging may be helpful to assess for thepresence and severity of PAD on an individualizedbasis, especially if establishing the diagnosis of PADwill lead to change in treatment (eg, different medicaltherapy, consideration of revascularization).
4. CTA, MRA, and catheter angiography are associated
with potential risks. CTA and catheter angiography
expose the patient to ionizing radiation and iodinatedcontrast, which are associated with the risk of contrastnephropathy and risks related to radiation exposure.
7,8
MRA exposes the patient to gadolinium-containing
contrast agents, certain formulations of which in-crease the risk of nephrogenic systemic ﬁbrosis in pa-
tients with renal disease.
10,12Risks of CTA and MRA
also include discomfort and complications related toJACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2515

Recommendation for Ampli ﬁers of Cardiovascular and Limb-Related Risk in Patients With PAD
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
1 C-EO1. In the evaluation of patients with PAD, clinician s should assess for and incorporate the presence of
PAD-related risk ampli ﬁers ( Table 9 ) when developing patient-focus ed treatment recommendations.intravenous line placement and contrast infusion
and potential for allergi c reactions. Beyond risk
associated with radiation and contrast exposure,catheter angiography is a s s o c i a t e dw i t hr i s ko f
procedural discomfort and access site complications,including bleeding events.
9In patients for whom
the diagnosis of PAD has been established, theprimary value of CTA, MRA, and catheter angiog-
raphy is to plan revascularization procedures when
they are clinically indicated (eg, for CLTI or func-tionally limiting claudication despite GDMT). Forpatients with asymptomatic PAD or chronic symp-tomatic PAD managed with GDMT for whom norevascularization is being considered, there is noneed to de ﬁne lower extremity artery anatomy, andthe risks of these imaging studies outweigh any
potential bene ﬁt.
4. SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS IN PAD:
RISK AMPLIFIERS, HEALTH DISPARITIES,AND PAD IN OLDER PATIENTS
Special considerations in the evaluation care of patients
with PAD include identi ﬁcation of factors that amplify the
risk of MACE and MALE. Additionally, recognizing health
disparities has the potential to impact outcomes for indi-
vidual patients as well as at the population level.
4.1. Ampli ﬁers of Cardiovascular and Limb-Related Risk in
Patients With PAD
Synopsis
Although all patients with PAD are at increased risk of
MACE and MALE, additional factors ( Table 9 ,Figure 3 )
have been identi ﬁed that further escalate this risk. Dia-
betes is a well-established risk factor for development ofPAD and is also associated with MACE and MALE,including CLTI and risk of amputation.
1-6Ongoing smok-
ing among patients with PAD has been associated withMACE and MALE.
7,8C K Da n dP A Ds h a r eac o m m o nu n -
derlying pathophysiology of in ﬂammation and oxidative
stress, and CKD is an established risk factor for PAD.9-16
Patients with PAD and CKD and particularly those withend-stage kidney disease (ESKD) are at high cardiovascu-lar risk as well as risk of amputation.
9-16Concomitant
microvascular disease (eg, retinopathy, neuropathy, ne-phropathy) has been associat ed with increased risk of
MALE among patients with PAD.
1-3,17-19Management of
hypertension is a critical component of GDMT, not onlybecause it is the most prevalent risk factor for PAD, but
also because uncontrolled hyp ertension is associated with
risk of MACE as well as CKD and polyvascular disease
20
(see Section 5.3 ,“Antihypertensive Therapy for PAD ”).
Polyvascular disease, de ﬁned as the presence of athero-
sclerotic disease involving $2 vascular beds (coronary,
peripheral, or cerebrovascular), is common among pa-tients with PAD and has recently emerged as an importantPAD-related risk ampli ﬁer.
20,21Patients with polyvascular
disease and PAD have compounded cardiovascular risk,including risk of myocardial infarction and stroke.14,21-29
In addition, polyvascular disease has recently been
recognized as a risk factor for MALE, perhaps re ﬂective of
increased severity of disease as well as an associated
prothrombotic state.21-31The combination of polyvascular
disease and diabetes is synergistic in terms of markedampli ﬁcation of risk among patients with PAD.
12,32-34
Depression has been recognized as a prevalent comor-
bidity among patients with PAD and has recently beenassociated with higher rates of MACE and MALE out-comes, as well as outcomes such as length of stay and
readmission after revascularization.
35-40Simple tools such
as the Geriatric Depression Score (GDS) or the PatientHeath Questionnaire (PHQ)-9 can be used to assess fordepression.
41,42
Beyond these PAD-related risk ampli ﬁers, certain pa-
tient demographics (eg, age, sex, race, ethnicity) andhealth disparities related to social determinants of health
(eg, racism, socioeconomic status) have been associated
with greater risk of MACE and MALE among those with
PAD. These are discussed further in Section 4.2 ,“Health
Disparities in PAD, ”and in a recently published AHA sci-
entiﬁc statement.
43
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Because of the association of PAD-related risk ampli ﬁers
with MACE and MALE, evaluation of patients with PADshould include assessment for the presence of theseGornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042516

factors ( Table 9 ) and recognition of the clinical impact
of these ampli ﬁers in developing a treatment plan.
Implementation of GDMT (see Section 5 ,“Medical
Therapy and Preventive F oot Care for Patients With
PAD ”) and meticulous longitudinal follow-up (see
Section 12 ,“Longitudinal Follow-Up of PAD ”)a r e
particularly important among those with PAD-relatedrisk ampli ﬁers, as well as awareness and patienteducation regarding risk of progression to CLTI with
associated risk of amputation. Patients with PAD andother forms of CVD can experience high levels ofdepression, stress, and anxiety.
39T h eG D Sc a nb eu s e d
to screen for depression in patients with PAD. The
presence of depressive symptoms (GDS $6) has been
associated with an increased mortality rate (MACE andMALE) in patients with PAD.
35FIGURE 3 Health Disparities and PAD-Related Risk Ampli ﬁers Increase Risk of MACE and MALE
MACE indicates major adverse cardiovascular events; MALE, major adverse limb events; and PAD, peripheral artery disease.JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2517

TABLE 9 PAD-Related Risk Ampli ﬁers
Risk Factor Epidemiology Data Supporting Ampli ﬁed Risk (MACE, MALE, or Both)
Older age (ie, $75 y) See Section 4.3 ,“Considerations in
Management of PAD in Older
Patients ”SeeSection 4.3 ,“Considerations in Management of PAD in Older Patients ”
Diabetes (see Section 5.5 ,
“Diabetes Management for
PAD ”)Among patients with diabetes, up
to 20% of patients >40 y of
age,130%>50 y of age,2,44
and 70% >70 y of age3
have PAD.Diabetes is associated with a higher risk of all-cause death (HR: 1.35 [95% CI: 1.15-1.60])
and MACE (HR: 1.47 [95% CI: 1.23-1.75]).4
Among patients undergoing endovascular revascularization, those with diabetes presented
more commonly with CLTI: 46.1% vs 25.5% for those without diabetes ( P<0.001).5
Diabetes is associated with a greater risk of lower extremity amputation (adjusted HR: 5.48
[95% CI: 4.16-7.22]).6
Ongoing smoking and use of other
forms of tobacco (see Section
5.4,“Smoking Cessation for
PAD ”)80%-90% of patients
revascularized for severe limbsymptoms are current
smokers.
8
OR 2.4 for developing
symptomatic PAD in current
smokers.45Ongoing smoking is associated with a signi ﬁcant increase in PAD-related hospitalizations,
revascularization procedures, and health care costs.7
The 5-y mortality rate with active smoking and chronic symptomatic PAD is 40%-50%.8
CKD
nEstimated glomerular
ﬁltration rate <60 mL/min/
1.73 m2.10Up to 25% of patients with CKD
have PAD.11-13
In a cohort study of >40,000
patients with PAD, 20.2% had
CKD stages 2 to 5.14CKD is associated with higher rates of the composite cardiovascular death, MI, and ischemic
stroke (6.75 vs 3.72 events/100 patient-years; adjusted HR: 1.45 [95% CI: 1.30-1.63]).15
The rates of all-cause death, cardiovascular events, and lower-limb complications,
including amputation, are higher among patients with CKD and PAD than those with
only CKD.16
Patients with CKD have a 1.8-fold higher risk of CAD and a 2.5-fold increased risk of MI.14
Despite a high risk of MACE, in the EUCLID trial, the combination of PAD and CKD was not
associated with an increased risk of MALE, hospitalization for ALI, or major amputation
(adjusted HR: 0.92 [95% CI: 0.66-1.28]) compared with PAD alone.15
Revascularization for CLTI in patients with CKD has a lower mortality rate (3.7% vs 5.3%;
adjusted OR: 0.78 [95% CI: 0.72-0.84]) and major amputation rate (adjusted OR: 0.33
[95% CI: 0.32-0.35]; P<0.001) compared with no revascularization.
Endovascular revascularization for CLTI with CKD has a lower in-hospital mortality rate
compared with open surgical revascularization (2.7% vs 4.7% [95% CI: 1.43-1.94]).46
ESKD (ie, dialysis dependence)
nMost advanced stage of CKD
(stage 5)Up to 45% of patients on dialysis
have PAD.33,34The 5-y survival rate among those with PAD after renal transplantation is 19% vs 48%
(P<0.001).47
ESKD and PAD are associated with a higher risk of lower extremity amputation and
readmission after revascularization than in patients with CKD and PAD.48
Among patients with ESKD undergoing lower extremity bypass, rates of limb salvage are
lower compared with kidney transplant recipients.47,49
Polyvascular disease
nAtherosclerosis within
$2 arterial beds: coronary,
peripheral artery, or
cerebrovascularUp to 45% of patients with known
atherosclerotic disease or
atherosclerotic risk factors have
polyvascular disease.14,21-23
Among 879 patients with PAD
undergoing lower extremity
angiography before
revascularization, 52% hadunderlying CAD (abnormal
coronary angiography or stress
test).
24Patients with PAD and CAD had a higher risk of all-cause death over 5 y (adjusted HR: 1.35
[95% CI: 1.02-1.80]) compared with those with only CAD.24
In the EUCLID trial of 13,885 patients with PAD, despite treatment with antiplatelet
therapy, MI occurred in 4.9% of the study participants over a median follow-up of
30 mo.25
In adults >60 y of age with a ﬁrst ischemic stroke, symptomatic PAD was independently
associated with increased risk of vascular events (HR: 2.76 [95% CI: 1.10-6.95]).26
Polyvascular disease and diabetes have the highest cardiovascular event rate (60%),27with
a stepwise increase in MACE with each additional atherosclerotic arterial bed, from
1.47 to 2.33 to 3.12 (trend, P¼0.0001).28,29
Higher rates of lower extremity revascularization, but not ALI or major amputation, were
seen with polyvascular disease in the EUCLID trial.23
The risk of MALE was reduced in patients with polyvascular disease treated with aspirin and
rivaroxaban in stable, chronic PAD (COMPASS trial) or after lower extremity
revascularization (VOYAGER PAD trial).30,31
Microvascular disease
nAbnormalities of the micro-
vasculature, often leading
to retinopathy, neuropathy,
and nephropathyMicrovascular disease increases
the risk of PAD 14-fold.1-3Among patients with PAD, concomitant microvascular disease increased the risk of
amputation 12- to 22.7-fold during longitudinal follow-up in 2 cohort studies compared
with those without microvascular disease.18,19
Depression A diagnosis of depression ( ICD-9 )
was identi ﬁed in 16% of
patients with PAD in a VA
population.36
14.1% of patients with PAD are
seen at specialty clinics with
symptoms of depression (PHQ-
8). Self-perceived stress
(28.7%) and anxiety (8.3%)are also prevalent.
39A Geriatric Depression Score $6 was associated with increased MACE during longitudinal
follow-up (mean 2.7 y) in an observational study that included 951 patients with PAD.35
In a VA population, a comorbid diagnosis of depression ( ICDcodes) among patients with
PAD was associated with a 13% higher rate of amputation and a 17% higher mortality ata median of 5.9 y follow-up.
36
A comorbid diagnosis of depression is associated with a longer length of stay and higher
rate of 30-d readmission among patients undergoing major open vascular surgery or
peripheral endovascular procedures for PAD.38
ABI indicates ankle-brachial index; ALI, acute limb ischemia; CAD, coronary artery disease; CKD, chronic kidney disease; CLTI, chronic limb-threa tening ischemia; COMPASS, Cardio-
vascular Outcomes for People Using Anticoagulation Strategies; ESKD, end-stage renal disease; EUCLID, Examining Use of Ticagrelor in Peripheral A rtery Disease; HR: hazard ratio; ICD,
International Classi ﬁcation of Diseases ; MACE, major adverse cardiovascular events; MALE, major adverse limb events; MI, myocardial infarction; OR, odds ratio; PAD, peripheral artery
disease; PHQ-8, Patient Health Questionnaire-8; VA, US Department of Veterans Affairs; and VOYAGER PAD, Vascular Outcomes Study of ASA (acetylsali cylic acid) Along with
Rivaroxaban in Endovascular or Surgical Limb Revascularization for PAD.Gornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042518

4.2. Health Disparities in PAD
Synopsis
Disparities in the detection, management, and out-
comes of PAD have long been present in the UnitedStates.
1,2High-risk racial and ethnic groups, along with
patients of lower socioeconomic status and patients whoreside in rural areas, experience disproportionatelyhigher rates of MALE.
3-11Although some of these patient
groups have a greater burden of risk-amplifying comor-
bidities (ie, diabetes, C KD, and ongoing smoking)
(Figure 3 ), these risk factors alone do not fully explain this
association with poorer PAD outcomes.12Social de-
terminants of health, including disparities in housing,health care access, and education, and inequities in per-sonal income and generational wealth all impact healthoutcomes. These structural barriers limit the equitableaccess to social, economic, and power resources. In
addition, structural racism perpetuates these health dis-
parities and inequities and has been hypothesized to beassociated with chronic stress, which can have an impacton health outcomes ( “weathering ”).
13-15An intersection-
ality exists between social determinants of health andPAD disparities across race, ethnicity, and income level.Low-income and disenfranchised communities are morelikely to have lower-quality school systems, low-wage
employment, limited access to high-quality affordable
foods, lower rates of uninterrupted health insurancecoverage, and poor access to early and consistent main-tenance of primary and specialty health care.
16Collec-
tively, in the United States, these factors result in a 4-foldhigher rate of major limb amputation, 30% higher rate ofCVD mortality, and 45% higher rate of stroke among BlackAmericans compared with non-Hispanic White Ameri-
cans.
17,18Beyond amputation, health disparities in MALE
among Black patients with PAD also include worseningrates of functional decline and lower rates ofrevascularization for CLTI.
5-8,19Health disparities in PAD
have been addressed in a recently published AHA scien-tiﬁcs t a t e m e n t .
2The AHA has also published a policy
statement establishing a comprehensive multiprongedstrategy to reduce nontraumatic limb amputation that
includes addressing health care disparities.
17
Recommendation-Speci ﬁcS u p p o r t i v eT e x t
1. Evidence of health disparities is common for patients
with PAD.2These disparities may be readily apparent or
difﬁcult to discern. Patient-centric efforts to address
health disparities include identifying patients fromdisenfranchised at-risk populations for symptoms and
s i g n so fP A D ,s u c ha se x e r t i o n a ll e gs y m p t o m sa n d
impairment in walking abilities, and conducting regularthorough physical examinations, including assessmentof the legs and feet and assessment of pulses for thoseat risk (see Section 2.2 ,“History and Physical Exami-
nation to Assess for PAD ”). Once PAD is diagnosed,
implementing a plan of care, including GDMT andmanagement of PAD-related risk ampli ﬁers and other
high-risk comorbidities, is crucial, recognizing the
presence of socioeconomic and other factors that mayrequire further interdisciplinary efforts to implementthe care plan (see Section 5 ,“Medical Therapy and
Preventive Foot Care for Patients With PAD, ”and
Section 6 ,“Exercise Therapy for PAD ”). Longitudinal
follow-up of all patients with PAD, particularly thosefrom disadvantaged at-risk populations, is important
because the risk of MACE and MALE is high (see
Section 12 ,“Longitudinal Follow-Up of PAD ”).
Beyond efforts in clinical practice and across health
care systems, opportunities exist for the cardiovascularcommunity and the public health infrastructure to
address disparities in PAD care and outcomes. In anRecommendation for Health Disparities in PAD
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
1 C-EO1. Clinicians and health care systems should actively pursue evidence of health disparities in diagnosis,
treatment, and outcomes for patients with PAD and use efforts to limit the impact of these disparities on
clinical outcomes.JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2519

AHA call to action to reduce lower extremity amputations,
policy recommendations and proposed policies includedthe following: broad adoption of quality measures for PADcare; affordable prevention, diagnosis, and managementtools; regulation of tobacco p roducts; clinical decision
support for PAD care; professional education; and dedi-
cated funding opportunities to support PAD research.
17
Each of these actions is required to improve PAD-relatedoutcomes among under-resourced groups and willrequire multidisciplinary and multistakeholder invest-ment to address the impact of social determinants ofhealth on outcomes in PAD.
4.2.1. Race and Ethnicity
Racial and ethnic disparities in the outcome and care
among patients with PAD are important public health is-
sues.
1,2In the United States, the prevalence of PAD is
higher among Black patients than White patients, and thisgap widens with increasing age.
3-6It has been estimated
that lifetime risks of PAD are 30% in Black men and w28%
in Black women but w1 9 %i nW h i t em e na n dw o m e na n d
w22% in Hispanic men and women.3,7Black patients in
the United States have high rates of risk-amplifyingcomorbidities, including systemic hypertension, dia-
b e t e s ,a n dC K D ,w h i c ha r ec l o s e l yr e l a t e dt ot h ed e v e l -
opment of PAD and higher risk of adverse outcomes.
1,8
PAD is identi ﬁed more often at a later stage in the dis-
ease process (ie, CLTI) among Black patients comparedwith White patients, highlighting opportunities for ini-tiatives focused on early disease detection and improvinghealth care access.
9Signi ﬁcant disparities in prescription
of GDMT have been reported among Black patients with
PAD, including lower rates of prescription of antiplatelet
a n ds t a t i nt h e r a p ya n dl o w e rp a r t i c i p a t i o ni ns u p e r v i s e dexercise therapy compare d with White patients.
10-12In
observational studies of individuals with PAD, Blackparticipants have been shown to have worse functionalstatus and more rapid functional decline, includingmobility loss, than White participants.
13,14
Rates of PAD-related amputation have served as an
objective marker of health disparities, and race and
ethnicity are closely tied to amputation risk. In the UnitedStates, Black populations, American Indian populations,and Hispanic populations have a higher risk of limbamputation compared with White populations.
15-17Black
patients have a 2- to 4-fold higher risk of amputationcompared with White patients,
18-20and this disparity is
ampli ﬁed in patients of advanc ed age (eg, Medicare
population $65 years).21,22This also mirrors the higher
rates of MACE experienced by the Black population.17,20
Potential mediators of the higher rate of amputation
among Black patients with PAD include more frequentpresentation with CLTI, lower likelihood of revasculari-
zation for CLTI in some but not all published analyses,and greater burden of high-risk comorbidities.
23,24In
addition, disparities in both medical insurance and accessto experienced health care centers providing multi-specialty care for PAD and limb salvage procedures maycontribute to the increased potential for lower extremity
amputation.
25These factors also contribute to lower rates
of revascularization procedures among Hispanic pop-ulations.
8,26,27Patients of American Indian descent are
densely populated in rural, Western states, creatinggeographic barriers to vascular care access and a higherlikelihood of presentation at a more advanced stage ofPAD with CLTI.
28Hispanic patients experienced lower
prevalence rates of PAD compared with either Black pa-
tients or American Indian patients.3,29Disease prevalence
notwithstanding, amputation rates within the Hispanicpopulation are similar to those of the Black population,with lower rates of revascularization compared withWhite patients.
27This may be explained partly by the
ﬁnding that Hispanic populations have the highest re-
ported rates of being uninsured among all racial andethnic groups and may further lack basic access to medi-
cal care because of communication (eg, language)
barriers.
30,31
The disproportionately higher risk of amputation
among patients of underrepresented racial and ethnicgroups may also re ﬂect systemic bias. For example, pre-
vious studies have shown that Black patients with PADare more likely to undergo amputation without attemptsat revascularization and are m ore frequently treated with
proximal amputation than White patients, which may be
driven by factors such as fragmented access tocare.
13,24,26,27,32-34
Implementation of interven tions to address the racial
disparity gap in amputation and revascularization hasbeen identi ﬁed as an advocacy priority for PAD (see
Section 13.2 ,“Advocacy Priorities ”). In addition,
increasing the participation of Black individuals and other
underrepresented groups in clinical trials across the
clinical spectrum of PAD is important.
4.2.2. Female Sex
Based on U.S. Census data, the estimated burden of PAD
among women who are >40 years of age is greater than
that of men who are >70 years of age.
1Women with PAD
present, on average, 10 to 20 years later than men.1
C o m p a r e dw i t hm e nw i t hP A D ,w o m e nw i t hP A Dt e n dt opresent with more atypical leg symptoms, are older, andhave more advanced disease.
2Women with PAD also have
poorer functional status and greater ambulatory limita-
tions than men with PAD at similar ABI values.3Studies
have shown mixed effects of sex on MACE among womencompared with men with PAD, although event rates arehigh in both groups.
1,4,5Further studies are needed to
understand sex-related differences in PAD risk,Gornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042520

R e c o m m e n d a t i o nf o rM a n a g e m e n to fP A Di nO l d e rP a t i e n t s
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
2a B-NR1. In older patients (ie, ‡75 years of age) with PAD, assessment for geriatric syndromes ( Table 10 ), such as
frailty, sarcopenia, malnutrition, an d mobility impairment, can be useful to identify high-risk patients,
including before revascularization, and to provide safe and goal-concordant care.1-15presentation, and outcomes in women.1,4It has been
shown that MALE among patients with PAD vary by sex.1,2
Women are at greater risk of undergoing above-knee
versus below-knee amputation, which has lasting conse-quences on mobility and morbidity.
6Women with PAD are
more likely to receive endovascular revascularization
versus surgical revascularization and have increased per-iprocedural mortality irrespective of the procedure per-formed.
7Despite the prevalence of PAD in women and
opportunities for improvement in MACE and MALE out-comes, women are underrepresented in contemporaryP A Dc o h o r t sa n dR C T sa sw e l la st r i a l so ft h e r a p i e sf o ratherosclerotic CVD in general.
8-10
4.2.3. Geography and Socioeconomic Status
The geographic location of a patient with PAD has been
shown to be associated with MALE. Patients in rural areasare at a greater risk of amputation than patients in urbanareas.
1Although this relationship is strongest among those
who are also from high-risk racial or ethnic groups, dis-parities in care also affect White patients living in ruralareas.
2-4Rural residents tend to be older, be moreeconomically disadvantaged, have higher burdens of
comorbidities, and practice riskier health behaviors (eg,ongoing smoking) than their urban counterparts.
4,5These
factors are magni ﬁed by greater barriers to health care ac-
cess because of geographic isolation and clinician short-
ages.6,7The impact of geography, socioeconomic status,
race, and other social determinants of health on PAD-related outcomes are undoubtedly interrelated and applyto urban as well as rural areas. In an analysis of Medicaredata, among bene ﬁciaries living in zip codes of metropol-
itan (urban) areas, Black race, lower median householdincome, and higher zip code score of the Distressed Com-munities Index were factors as sociated with amputation.
8
The Distressed Communities Index is a metric that scores
communities based on economic factors associated withsocial determinants of heal th, including percentage of
individuals with no high school diploma, housing vacancyrate, percentage of adults not working, poverty rate,median income, and change in employment.
9
4.3. Considerations in Management of PAD in Older Patients
Synopsis
PAD disproportionately affects individuals in the later
decades of life, with an estimated prevalence of >15%
among those >80 years of age.16Therefore, the identi-
ﬁcation of PAD is important in at-risk older patients
(previously de ﬁned in ACC/AHA guidelines as $75 years
of age)17through routine assessment comprising history
a n dp h y s i c a le x a m i n a t i o ni n c l u d i n gt h ea s s e s s m e n to fthe leg and foot and pulses. This is essential becausethe concomitant presence of geriatric syndromes(Table 10 ), such as frailty, sarcopenia, malnutrition, and
functional decline, in older patients may obscure
symptoms associated with PAD until it reaches anadvanced state. The physi cal examination identi ﬁes
signs of previously unrecognized PAD, with opportu-nities to provide appropriate clinical evaluation (seeSection 2 ,“Clinical Assessment for PAD ”)a n dc a r e .
Older patients with PAD have a much higher prevalenceof multimorbidity and polypharmacy.
18,19The concomi-
tant presence of other comorbidities or age-relateddegenerative processes may accentuate the impact of
PAD in the older population and requires nuancedattention and care. Speci ﬁcally, the presence of geriatric
syndromes, including frailty and sarcopenia, confers a
greater risk for MACE, MALE, and death ( Table 10 ).
Older patients with PAD who have $1 of these geriatric
syndromes have worse outcomes with revascularizationor amputation; decisions for invasive treatment meritspeci ﬁc consideration in this cohort.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁcS u p p o r t i v eT e x t
1. Geriatric syndromes, inclu ding frailty, sarcopenia,
malnutrition, and mobility impairment, frequentlycomplicate the care of patients with PAD. Clinical toolshave been evaluated to assess for frailty in the context
of PAD, such as the Clinical Frailty Scale, the modi ﬁed
Frailty Index, the Risk Analysis Index, and others.
11,12
The impact of these conditions on the treatment of pa-
tients with PAD is listed in Table 10 . In retrospective
c o h o r t so fp a t i e n t sw i t hP AD, morbidity, functionalJACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2521

status, prescription of GDM T, and overall mortality
were signi ﬁcantly worse after reva scularization pro-
cedures and major amputation in elderly patients whencompared with younger patients with PAD.
14,15,20,21
Identi ﬁcation of these geriatric syndromes in older
adults with PAD can be a catalyst for shared decision-
making to evaluate the use of endovascular, surgical,
or hybrid revascularization procedures to balance therisk of complications or loss of independence againstthe potential for improved QOL and palliation ofsymptoms with a limited life span.5. MEDICAL THERAPY AND PREVENTIVE FOOT
CARE FOR PATIENTS WITH PAD
GDMT for PAD is implemented to reduce the risk of pro-
gression to more symptomatic and limb-threatening clin-ical presentations of PAD and MALE and to reduce the risko fM A C E ,p a r t i c u l a r l yd e a t h ,M I ,a n ds t r o k e( Figure 4 ).
Medical therapy for PAD may also be implemented toimprove leg symptoms attributable to claudication. Forpatients with PAD, preventive foot care is implemented toprevent the development of ulceration and the risk of CLTI.TABLE 10 Geriatric Syndromes and Considerations in the Management of PAD in Older Patients
Consideration Description and Characterization
Frailty nCan be assessed among patients with PAD using measures such as the Clinical Frailty Scale, the modi ﬁed Frailty Index, the Risk
Analysis Index, and others.11,12
nElevated rates of MACE associated with frailty and claudication.12
n2-y survival rate was reduced depending on degree of frail ty in patients undergoing revascularization for CLTI.11
nFrailty is highly predictive of 30-d mortality ra te for all PAD revascularization procedures.10
Sarcopenia nAge-related loss of muscle mass.7,9,22,23
nSarcopenia was 10 times more prevalent in those with PAD than age-matched controls without PAD.22
nSarcopenia is associated with lower survival rate8,9a n dh i g h e rr i s ko fM A C E9and MALE.7
nPatients with sarcopenia are at increased risk for muscle mass loss in the lower extremities.23
Malnutrition nCommon in older patients with PAD, affecting up to 50% of individuals.13
n5 - ys u r v i v a lr a t ei nt h o s ew i t hP A Di sd i r e c t l yr e l a t e dt oG N R Is t r a t i ﬁcation of nutritional risk.6
nIn patients with CLTI, 30-d mortality was 5 times higher in those with severe malnutrition compared with those with moderate or
no malnutrition.5
n5-y amputation-free survival rate in patie nts undergoing surgical revascularization for CLTI was worsened relative to poorer
nutritional status.4
Mobility impairment nThe presence of PAD was associated with poor physical function compared with those without PAD.3
nAmbulatory patients >75 y of age with PAD were 13.51-fold more likely to e xperience functionally limiting pain than those
without PAD.2
nPatients >65 y of age with PAD had a more rapid decline in life-space mobility and a higher mortality rate than those without
PAD.1
Revascularization
considerationsnAge>80 y was associated with an increased mortality rate after endovascular or surgical revascularization for infrainguinal
PAD.14,15
nAmong patients $70 y of age with CLTI, those with dependent functional s tatus had a higher mortality rate than those with
independent functional status after infrainguinal bypass surgery.20
nOlder patients were less likely to be prescribed GDMT (including a ntiplatelet therapy, statin, an d ACE inhibitor/ARB) than those
10 y younger after endovascular revascularization.21
nIn patients >70 y of age with CLTI and <2-y predicted survival, a comparison of treatment with medical therapy, endovascular,
or surgical revascularization showed no di fference in QOL or health status outcomes.24
Impact of amputation nMorbidity and mortality rates associated with amputation in olde r patients are exceptionally high, and mortality rates increased
by approximately 4% for every year of age.25
nIn older patients with CLTI at high risk for surgery, infraingu inal bypass conferred lower risk of a 30-d mortality rate than
amputation.26
nIn patients >70 y of age treated for CLTI, 46 of 200 patients underwent amputation within 1 y (23%),27with signi ﬁcant
improvement in QOL at 6 and 12 mo but no differe nce in objective measures of health status.
Polypharmacy nTypically described as prescribing $5 medications.
nIncreasingly common in older patients (24% of older patients in 2000 and 39% of older adults in 2012).18,19
nTailoring of medical therapies and shared decision-making are s trategies to minimize impact of polypharmacy in older patients
with PAD.
ACE indicates angiotensin-enzyme converting; ARB, angiotensin-receptor blocker; CLTI, chronic limb-threatening ischemia; GDMT, guideline-di rected management and therapy; GNRI,
Geriatric Nutritional Risk Index; MACE, major adverse cardiovascular events; MALE, major adverse limb events; PAD, peripheral artery disease; and QOL, quality of life.Gornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042522

5.1. Antiplatelet and Antithrombotic Therapy for PAD
Recommendations for Antiplatelet and Antithrombotic Therapy for PAD
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1A1. In patients with symptomatic PAD, single antipla telet therapy is recommended to reduce the risk of
MACE.1-4
1 B-R2. In patients with symptomatic PAD , single antiplatelet therapy with clopidogrel alone (75 mg daily) is
recommended to reduce the risk of MACE.4
1 C-LD3. In patients with symptomatic PAD, single antiplatele t therapy with aspirin alone (range, 75-325 mg daily)
is recommended to reduce the risk of MACE.1-3
1A4. In patients with symptomatic PAD, low-dose rivar oxaban (2.5 mg twice daily) combined with low-dose
aspirin is effective to reduce the risk of MACE and MALE.5,6
1 B-R5. After endovascular or surgical revascularizati on for PAD, antiplatelet therapy is recommended.1,7-9
1A6. After endovascular or surgical revascularization for PAD, low-dose rivaroxaban (2.5 mg twice daily)
combined with low-dose aspirin is recomme nded to reduce the risk of MACE and MALE.7
2a C-LD7. After endovascular revascularization for PAD, dual antiplatelet therapy with a P2Y12 antagonist and low-
dose aspirin is reasonable for at least 1 to 6 months.8-11
2a C-LD8. After endovascular or surgical revascularization in patients with PAD who require full-intensity anti-
coagulation for another indication and are not at high risk of bleeding, adding single antiplatelet therapy
is reasonable.12,13
2a C-EO9. In patients with asymptomatic PAD, single antiplat elet therapy is reasonable to reduce the risk of MACE.
2b B-R10. In patients with symptomatic PAD without recent revascularization, the bene ﬁt of dual antiplatelet
therapy is uncertain.14,15
2b B-R11. In patients with symptomatic PAD, the bene ﬁt of vorapaxar added to existing antiplatelet therapy is
uncertain.16
2b B-R12. After surgical revascularization for PAD with a pros thetic graft, dual antiplat elet therapy with a P2Y12
antagonist and low-dose aspirin may be reasonable for at least 1 month.17
3: Harm A13. In patients with PAD without another indication (eg, atrial ﬁbrillation), full-intensity oral anti-
coagulation should not be used to reduce the risk of MACE and MALE.18-20JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2523

Synopsis
Antiplatelet and antithrom botic therapies are core
components of medical therapy for patients with PAD.Aspirin or other antiplatelet drugs are used to prevent MI,
ischemic stroke, and vascular death in patients with
clinical atherosclerosis (eg, symptomatic PAD, CAD, or
cerebrovascular disease).
1,4-6The value of these agents in
a s y m p t o m a t i cP A Di sl e s sc e r t a i nb e c a u s ec l i n i c a lt r i a l sshow a higher risk of bleeding with these regimens, whichmay offset any lowering of the risk of ischemic events.
21,22
The use of dual antiplatelet therapy (eg, aspirin plus
clopidogrel) and the use of more potent antiplateletmedications (eg, vorapaxar) in patients without recent
revascularization (ie, revascularization within 6 months)
is also uncertain based on higher risks of bleeding.
14,15,16
Recent RCTs have shown that the low-dose direct oral
anticoagulant rivaroxaban plus low-dose aspirin preventsischemic events compared with aspirin alone but with ahigher risk of ma jor bleeding.
5,6Many patients with
symptomatic PAD have had previous revascularization( e i t h e re n d o v a s c u l a ro rs u r g i c a l ) ,a n ds t u d i e sh a v es h o w n
that these patients are at high er residual risk of cardio-
vascular and limb events; however, no evidence is avail-able to support the use of more potent antiplatelet agentsor dual antiplatelet therapy outside of a recent revascu-larization procedure. Additionally, the use of full-intensity oral anticoagulation (in the absence of anotherindication, such as atrial ﬁbrillation) is not warranted and
may be harmful.
In patients with PAD who have undergone revascular-
ization procedures, antiplatelet and antithrombotic ther-apies have been shown to reduce the occurrence ofrecurrent symptoms and MALE. The decision to add amedication or continue an ex isting medication is depen-
dent on multiple factors, including comorbid patientconditions such as CAD, complexity of the revasculariza-tion procedure, and overall patient risk of MACE and
MALE.
7,10,11
The factors favoring addition of antiplatelet medica-
tion, antithrombotic medication, or both are balancedagainst the risk of bleeding. The VOYAGER PAD (VascularOutcomes Study of ASA [acetylsalicylic acid] Along withRivaroxaban in Endovascular or Surgical Limb Revascu-larization for PAD) showed that the risk of ischemic limbevents, and the overall primary endpoint, was reduced by
low-dose rivaroxaban in combination with low-dose
a s p i r i ni np a t i e n t sw i t h o u tap r e v i o u ss t r o k eo rincreased risk of bleeding.
7Dual antiplatelet therapy after
endovascular revascularization is supported indirectly bydata from percutaneous coronary intervention and its usein major trials of endovascular revascularization usingdifferent devices for PAD.
8-11Similarly, limited data from
percutaneous coronary inte rventions support the use of
single antiplatelet ther apy after endovascularrevascularization in patients on full-dose anticoagulation
for another indication (eg, atrial ﬁbrillation or venous
thromboembolism).12,13
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1-3.Single antiplatelet ther apy reduces the risk of MACE
in patients with symptomatic PAD with or withoutprevious revascularization. Although aspirin has his-torically been used as the antiplatelet agent for pre-vention of MACE among patients with PAD, recenttrials have shown the ef ﬁcacy of P2Y12 inhibitors in
this patient population.
1-4,23Single antiplatelet ther-
apy with clopidogrel had improved ef ﬁcacy compared
with aspirin for prevention of MACE in the CAPRIE
(Clopidogrel versus Aspirin in Patients at Risk ofIschemic Events) trial, with similar rates of bleeding.
4
Single antiplatelet therapy with the P2Y12 inhibitorticagrelor had similar rates of ef ﬁcacy and safety
outcomes compared with clopidogrel in the EUCLID(Examining Use of Ticagrelor in Peripheral ArteryDisease) trial, although rates of adverse events in
those treated with ticagrelor were higher.
23A recent
m e t a - a n a l y s i so ft r i a l si np a t i e n t sw i t hC A D ,c e r e b r o -vascular disease, or PAD suggested that the value ofsingle antiplatelet therap y with P2Y12 inhibitors was
similar to aspirin.
24
4. The COMPASS (Cardiovascular Outcomes for People
Using Anticoagulation Strategies) trial assessed low-dose anticoagulation with rivaroxaban (2.5 mg twice
daily) in addition to low-dose aspirin in patients with
CVD who did not have a high risk of bleeding, historyof hemorrhagic or lacunar stroke, severe kidney dis-ease, or need for dual antipl atelet or anticoagulation
therapy.
5In this study, low-dose rivaroxaban added
to low-dose aspirin reduced the risk of MACE andMALE.
5In a subgroup analysis of the COMPASS trial
among patients with symptomatic PAD, carotid dis-
ease, or CAD with an abnormal ABI, this regimen also
reduced the risk of MACE and MALE but with an in-crease in risk of major bleeding.
25In another subgroup
analysis of the COMPASS trial in patients with PAD,this regimen reduced the risk of MALE but with anincrease in risk of major bleeding.
6
5. The use of antiplatelet agents after lower extremity
endovascular or surgical revascularization is common
clinical practice, although this has not been well
studied in placebo-controlled trials. Small historicaltrials and a subsequent meta-analysis provide supportfor the use of single antiplatelet therapy in thissetting.
1The use of antiplatelet therapy after revas-
cularization is recommended because revasculariza-tion is generally reserved for patients withsymptomatic PAD. Furthermore, contemporary
studies evaluating paclitaxel-coated devices forGornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042524

revascularization in patients with PAD have mandated
dual antiplatelet therapy in all patients.8,9In the
VOYAGER PAD trial, aspirin monotherapy was
m a n d a t e da tt h et i m eo fr e v a s cularization procedures,
and the combination of low-dose aspirin and low-doserivaroxaban led to an improvement in the risk ofMALE.
7
6. The VOYAGER PAD trial assessed a regimen of low-
dose rivaroxaban (2.5 mg twice daily) in addition tolow-dose aspirin in patients within 10 days of lowerextremity revascularization who were not on anti-
coagulation for another indication or had planned
P2Y12 receptor antagonist use.
7Patients at high risk
for bleeding, including those with previous stroke orintracranial hemorrhage, intracranial tumor orvascular abnormality, or gastrointestinal bleeding inthe previous 6 months, were excluded. This regimenreduced the risk of a compo site endpoint of MACE and
MALE compared with aspirin alone, mainly driven by
lower rates of ALI.
77. Dual antiplatelet therapy after endovascular revascu-
larization for PAD is extrapolated from the use of thisregimen after percutaneous coronary intervention.
Trials assessing drug-eluting stents and drug-coated
balloons for revascularization of PAD generally rec-ommended and required dual antiplatelet therapy for2 to 6 months after revascularization.
8,9Observational
studies have suggested a potential bene ﬁto fd u a l
antiplatelet therapy compared with single antiplatelettherapy after revascularization, particularly amongthe subgroup of patients with CLTI.
10,11
8. The combination of full-intensity oral anticoagulation
and dual antiplatelet therapy, known as “triple ther-
apy, ”is associated with an increased risk of bleeding
complications. Recent trials in patients with an indi-cation for full-intensity oral anticoagulation who un-dergo percutaneous coronary intervention supportthe use of single antiplatelet therapy (aspirin or P2Y12inhibitor) in addition to oral anticoagulation.
12,13
These data may be applied to support singleFIGURE 4 Medical Therapy and Foot Care for PAD
Colors correspond to Table 3 .Aﬁb indicates atrial ﬁbrillation; BID, 2 times daily; CLTI, chronic limb-threatening ischemia; DAPT, dual antiplatelet therapy; PAD, pe-
ripheral artery disease; SAPT, single antiplatelet therapy; SARS-CoV-2, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2; and VTE, venous thrombo embolism.JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2525

antiplatelet therapy for patients with PAD who un-
dergo endovascular or surgical revascularization, whoare not at elevated risk of bleeding, and who have
another indication for full-intensity anticoagulation(eg, atrial ﬁbrillation, venous thromboembolism). An
ACC Expert Consensus Decision Pathway on oral
anticoagulation and antiplatelet therapy has beenpublished, although it focuses primarily on evidenceand clinical scenarios/medication regimens for pa-tients undergoing percutaneous coronary interven-tion.
13Guidelines for management of atrial ﬁbrillation
that include recommendations for oral anti-coagulation in the setting of other comorbidities,
including PAD, have also been published.
26
9. Patients with asymptomatic PAD may be too func-
tionally limited to allow for the development of legsymptoms. Despite a lack of reported symptoms,patients with asymptomatic PAD have beendemonstrated to be at increased risk of MACE,including mortality.
27,28Several studies have
attempted to address whether patients with
asymptomatic PAD, de ﬁned as having an abnormal
ABI with no reported leg symptoms (eg, as identi ﬁed
during a screening examination), derived bene ﬁt
from aspirin; however, none have providedadequate evidence.
2,21,22The CLIPS (Critical Leg
Ischemia Prevention) trial randomized symptomaticand asymptomatic patients with abnormal ABI orTBI (de ﬁned as <0.85 and <0.6, respectively) to
aspirin or placebo but was stopped early and sub-
sequently underpowered to assess the effect ofa s p i r i no nM A C Ea n dM A L Ei nt h es u b g r o u po fp a -tients with asymptomatic PAD.
2Both the AAA
(Aspirin for Asymptomatic Atherosclerosis) trial andthe POPADAD (Prevention of Progression of ArterialDisease and Diabetes) trial used a higher ABIthreshold for enrollment in the study than is
considered diagnostic of asymptomatic PAD
(ABI#0.95 and <1.00, respectively) and had a rela-
tively high mean ABI among individuals randomized(approximately 0.86 and 0.90, respectively), limitingthe generalizability of ﬁndings to the asymptomatic
PAD patient population.
21,22Despite the lack of evi-
dence speci ﬁc to patients with asymptomatic PAD,
single antiplatelet therapy to prevent MACE is
reasonable based on the increased cardiovascular
risk in this population, the ﬁnding that a signi ﬁcant
proportion of patients with asymptomatic PAD willhave leg symptoms if administered an objectivewalking test, and studies that have demonstrated ahigh prevalence of CAD among patients withlow ABI.
27-30Further, single antiplatelet therapy is
recommended in patients with asymptomatic PAD
and other clinical indications for this therapy (eg,known CAD, cerebrovascular disease, previous cor-
onary or other arterial revascularization).31,32
10. Outside of the setting of recent revascularization, dual
antiplatelet therapy has only been assessed in sub-groups of patients with PAD enrolled in larger trials,
usually in patients with previous MI, other athero-
sclerotic disease, or both. The value of dual anti-platelet therapy is uncertain, partly because thesesubgroups were underpowered to fully examine ef ﬁ-
cacy and safety (ie, risk of bleeding) in patients withPAD, such as in the PEGASUS-TIMI 54 (Prevention ofCardiovascular Events in Patients with Prior HeartAttack Using Ticagrelor Compared to Placebo on a
Background of Aspirin –Thrombolysis In Myocardial
Infarction 54) tri al and the CHARISMA (Clopidogrel for
High Atherothrombotic Risk and Ischemic Stabiliza-tion, Management, and Avoidance) trial.
14,15
11. In the TRA 2P –TIMI 50 (Thrombin Receptor Antagonist
in Secondary Prevention of AtherothromboticIschemic Events –Thrombolysis In Myocardial Infarc-
tion 50) trial, the antiplat elet agent vorapaxar, an
antagonist of the protease activated receptor-1, in
addition to antiplatelet therapy, generally withaspirin or clopidogrel, decreased the risk of MALE,including hospitalization for ALI and lower extremityrevascularization in the cohort of 3,787 patients withsymptomatic PAD.
16In the PAD cohort, no signi ﬁcant
difference in MACE was observed; however, a signif-icantly higher risk of moderate to severe bleeding was
observed among those randomized to vorapaxar
compared with the placebo group, thus resulting in anuncertain net clinical bene ﬁt.
16Vorapaxar is contra-
indicated in patients with previous stroke due to anincreased risk of intracranial hemorrhage.
33
12. Data supporting dual antiplatelet therapy after lower
extremity bypass grafting are limited and uncertain,but a subgroup analysis of the CASPAR (Clopidogrel
and Acetylsalicylic Acid in Bypass Surgery for Pe-
ripheral Arterial Disease) trial found that the combi-nation of low-dose aspirin plus clopidogrel 75 mgdaily reduced a composite endpoint of MALE or deathin patients who underwent prosthetic rather thanautogenous vein grafts compared with low-doseaspirin alone.
17
13. RCTs and observational studies have uniformly
demonstrated that full-intensity oral anticoagulation
therapy aimed at decreasing MACE among patientswith PAD provided no bene ﬁt and resulted in increased
morbidity rates.
18-20 ,34In the WAVE (Warfarin Anti-
platelet Vascular Evaluati on) trial of patients with
atherosclerotic vascular disease, including PAD, nodifference was observed in cardiovascular ischemicevents among patients randomized to full-intensity
oral anticoagulation and antiplatelet therapy versusGornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042526

antiplatelet therapy alone.18In addition, an increase
was seen in bleeding endpoints, including life-threatening and intracranial bleeding.
18One RCT
demonstrated an increased death rate among patientsrandomized to warfarin plus aspirin versus aspirin
alone after lower extremity bypass grafting.
19This
recommendation regarding use of full-intensity oralanticoagulation in patients with PAD is distinct fromrecommendations regarding low-dose oral anti-coagulation using rivaroxaban in combination withlow-dose aspirin. Furthermore, this recommendation
does not apply to patients for whom full-intensity oralanticoagulation is required for another clinical indica-tion, such as atrial ﬁbrillation or venous thromboem-
bolism. Recent clinical practice guidelines for
management of atrial ﬁbrillation include recommen-
dations for anticoagulation in the setting of othercomorbidities, including PAD.
26
5.2. Lipid-Lowering Therapy for PAD
Recommendations for Lipid-Lowering Therapy for PAD
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1A1. In patients with PAD, treatment with high-intensity statin therapy is indicated, with an aim of achieving
a‡50% reduction in low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) level.1-3
2a B-R2. In patients with PAD who are on maximally toler ated statin therapy and have an LDL-C level of
‡70 mg/dL, it is reasonable to add PCSK9 inhibitor therapy.1,4-6
2a B-R3. In patients with PAD who are on maximally toler ated statin therapy and have an LDL-C level of
‡70 mg/dL, it is reasonable to add ezetimibe therapy.1,7
Synopsis
Dyslipidemia is a common atherosclerotic risk factor in
patients with PAD. Lipid-lowering therapy with statin
medications has been shown to improve outcomes (MACEand MALE) and should be prescribed for all patients withPAD.
1-3Despite signi ﬁcant evidence supporting its bene ﬁt,
statin therapy is underprescribed among patients withP A Dc o m p a r e dw i t hp a t i e n t sw i t ho t h e ra t h e r o s c l e r o t i ccardiovascular disord ers, especially CAD.
8,9Evidence
supports the use of high-intensity statins and lowering of
LDL-C to levels <70 mg/dL based on subgroup analyses
from RCTs.4-7,9Statin use and statin initiation have been
reported to be safe and effective in large cohorts of pa-tients with PAD, despite the potential concern for over-
lapping lower extremity symptoms of PAD and adversemuscle effects from statins.
10,11
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. The 2018 AHA/ACC cholesterol guideline1makes a COR
1 ,L O EAr e c o m m e n d a t i o nf o rt h ei n i t i a t i o no rc o n t i n -uation of high-intensity statin therapy ( Table 11 ), with
the aim of achieving a $50% reduction in LDL-C levels
in all patients who are #75 years of age with athero-
sclerotic CVD, including those patients with PAD. Theuse of statins to lower the risk of MACE in patients withPAD was ﬁrst established in a subgroup analysis of the
Heart Protection Study.
3More recently, multiple
observational studies ha ve reported lower rates of
M A C Ea n dM A L Ei np a t i e n t sw i t hP A Dw h ow e r et r e a t e dwith statin therapy, with the largest study involving
155,647 patients from the U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs health care system and showing lower rates of
amputation and death in unadjusted and adjusted an-alyses.
9A meta-analysis of 138,060 patients that was
focused on MALE showed that statins reduced the riskof MALE by 30% and, speci ﬁcally, amputation by 35%
and all-cause death by 39%.
2Studies focusing on pa-
tients with CLTI, endovascular and surgical revascu-larization, and lower extremity amputation have also
conﬁrmed the association of statin therapy with im-
provements in amputation, revascularization, andmortality rates.
10-15Indirect yet supporting evidence
from PAD subgroup analyses of large RCTs of otherlipid-lowering agents have shown that treatment stra-tegies to lower LDL-C values <70 mg/dL are associated
with improved rates of MACE and MALE.
4,5,7
2. In 2 subgroup analyses of studies evaluating PCSK9
inhibitors, use of alirocumab and evolocumab in pa-
tients with PAD were associated with lower rates ofM A C Ea n dM A L Ec o m p a r e dw i t hp l a c e b o .
4,5Theﬁnd-
ings from the PAD subanalysis of the FOURIER (FurtherCardiovascular Outcomes Research with PCSK9 Inhibi-tion in Subjects with Elevat ed Risk) study showed that
evolocumab was associated with a lower occurrence ofMACE (HR: 0.79 [95% CI: 0.66-0.94]; P¼0.0098) and
MALE (HR: 0.63 [95% CI: 0.39-1.03]; P¼0.063) compared
with placebo.
4In the ODYSSEY OUTCOMES trial (Eval-
uation of Cardiovascular Outcomes After an AcuteJACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2527

Coronary Syndrome During Treatment With Alir-
ocumab), alirocumab was associated with a numeri-cally lower rate of MACE (22.8% versus 23.9%; P¼NS)
and signi ﬁcantly lower rates of MALE, including pro-
gression to CLTI, revascularization, or unplannedamputation (HR: 0.59 [95% CI: 0.40 –0.86]) in patients
with previously diagnosed PAD.
5,6This recommenda-
tion for the use of PCSK9 inhibitors in patients with
PAD who have not achieved an LDL target of <70 mg/
dL aligns with the 2018 AHA/ACC cholesterol guidelinerecommendation for patients with clinical atheroscle-rotic CVD.
1
3. In a subgroup analysis of the IMPROVE-IT (Improved
Reduction of Outcomes: Vytorin Ef ﬁcacy International
Trial) involving 1,005 patients with extracoronaryatherosclerotic arterial dis ease, including PAD, there
was a lower rate of MACE (45.2% versus 49.5%), fa-voring ezetimibe for the pri mary composite endpoint of
cardiovascular death, major coronary event, orischemic stroke at 7 years.
7No data support the use of
ezetimibe to prevent MALE in patients with PAD. Thisrecommendation for the use of ezetimibe in patients
with PAD who have not achieved an LDL target of
<70 mg/dL aligns with the 2018 AHA/ACC cholesterol
guideline recommendation for patients with clinicalatherosclerotic CVD.
1
5.3. Antihypertensive Therapy for PADTABLE 11 High-, Moderate-, and Low-Intensity Statin Therapy *
High Intensity Moderate Intensity Low Intensity
LDL-C lowering † $50% 30%-49% <30%
Statins Atorvastatin 40 –80 mg
Rosuvastatin 20 –40 mgAtorvastatin 10 –20 mg
Rosuvastatin 5 –10 mg
Simvastatin 20 –40 mg ‡Simvastatin 10 mg
Pravastatin 10-20 mg
Lovastatin 20 mg
Fluvastatin 20-40 mg Pravastatin 40 –80 mg
Lovastatin 40 –80 mg
Fluvastatin XL 80 mg
Fluvastatin 40 mg twice dailyPitavastatin 1 –4m g
Percent LDL-C reductions with the statin medications used in clinical practice (atorvastatin, rosuvastatin, simvastatin) were estimated using th e median reduction in LDL-C from the
VOYAGER database.16Reductions in LDL-C for other statin medications ( ﬂuvastatin, lovastatin, pitavastatin, pravastatin) were identi ﬁed according to FDA-approved product labeling in
adults with dyslipidemia, primary hypercholesterolemia, and mixed dyslipidemia.17FDA indicates U.S. Food and Drug Administration; LDL-C, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol; RCT,
randomized controlled trial; and VOYAGER PAD, Vascular Outcomes Study of ASA [acetylsalicylic acid] Along with Rivaroxaban in Endovascular or Surg ical Limb Revascularization for
Peripheral Artery Disease. Modi ﬁed with permission from Grundy et al.1Copyright 2018 American Heart Association, Inc., and American College of Cardiology Foundation.
*Percent reductions are estimates from data across large populations. Individual responses to statin therapy varied in the RCTs and should be expect ed to vary in clinical practice.16
†LDL-C lowering that should occur with the dosage listed below each intensity.
‡Although simvastatin 80 mg was evaluated in RCTs, initiation of simvastatin 80 mg or titration to 80 mg is not recommended by the FDA because of the incre ased risk of myopathy,
including rhabdomyolysis.
Recommendations for Antihypertensive Therapy for PAD
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1A1. In patients with PAD and hypertension, antihyperte nsive therapy should be administered to reduce the
risk of MACE.1-5
1 B-R2. In patients with PAD and hypertension, a systolic blood pressure (SBP) goal of <130 mm Hg and a diastolic
blood pressure target of <80 mm Hg is recommended.5-9
1 B-R3. In patients with PAD and hypertension, the select ive use of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)
inhibitors or angioten sin-receptor blockers is recomm ended to reduce the risk of MACE.10-12Gornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042528

Synopsis
Hypertension is the most common cardiovascular risk
factor.13Hypertension is found in 35% to 55% of patients
when they are diagnosed with PAD.14Additionally, hy-
pertension has been associ ated with a longitudinal
decline in ABI in adults >65 years of age.15In addition to
data regarding the bene ﬁts of hypertension management
in modifying cardiovascular risk, data from 2 RCTs pro-vide the only direct evidence to support speci ﬁca g e n t s ,
ACE inhibitors and angiotensin-receptor antagonists, forblood pressure control among patients with PAD.
10,11
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Treatment of hypertension is indicated among patients
with PAD to reduce the risk of MACE, including stroke,MI, heart failure, and cardiovascular death.
1Histori-
cally, some concern has been expressed that lowerblood pressure targets may compromise blood ﬂow to a
lower extremity with impaired perfusion caused byPAD and worsen limb symptoms.
1However, to date,
multiple studies have shown improvement in symp-
toms of claudication and functional status in patientswith PAD and treated hypertension, including patientstreated with beta blockers and no signal for adverseoutcomes in terms of MALE.
2-4
2. The 2017 ACC/AHA hypert ension clinical practice
guideline assigns a COR 1 recommendation for a goalblood pressure of <130/80 mm Hg in patients with
known cardiovascular risk.
5Few trials have speci ﬁcally
evaluated blood pressure goals among patientswith PAD. SPRINT (Systolic Blood Pressure Inter-vention Trial) found that an aggressive SBP target of<1 2 0m mH g ,c o m p a r e dw i t hs t a n d a r dt r e a t m e n t( S B P
target of <140 mm Hg), in patients with known CVD
reduced rates of cardiovascular outcomes and associ-ated mortality. However, only a small subset of patients
in this trial had PAD.
6In ABCD (Appropriate Blood
Pressure Control in Diabe tes Study), among a subset
of participants with PAD (de ﬁned as ABI <0.90), inten-
sive blood pressure control (mean blood pressure,128/75 mm Hg) was associated with a reduction in MACEcompared with moderate blood pressure control (meanblood pressure, 137/81 mm Hg).
9Conversely, in a post
h o ca n a l y s i so fp a t i e n t sw i t hb o t hP A Da n dC A Df r o mINVEST (International Vera pamil-SRV Trandolapril
S t u d y ) ,ah i g h e rh a z a r do fa l l - c a u s ed e a t h ,n o n f a t a lM I ,and nonfatal stroke was observed in patients with PAD
who had low SBP as well as high SBP.
7Similarly, Itoga
et al8reported an association between PAD events and
low and high SBP in a subanalysis of ALLHAT (Antihy-pertensive and Lipid-Lowering Treatment to PreventHeart Attack Trial).
8Additionally, in the EUCLID trial, a
higher risk of MACE was observed in patients with out-of-range high and low SBP.
16Recommended blood
pressure goals for patients with PAD are consistent with
the 2017 ACC/AHA high blood pressure guideline.5
3. The HOPE (Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation) trial
enrolled patients at high cardiovascular risk to deter-mine the role of ramipril in reduction of cardiovascularevents; patients with known left ventricular systolicdysfunction and heart failure were excluded. Ramiprilwas associated with a signi ﬁcant reduction in risk of
death, stroke, and revascularization In a subgroup
analysis of patients with PAD (de ﬁned as an ABI #0.9),
ramipril showed a similar reduction in risk of MI, stroke,or vascular death by 25%.
10Subsequently, in ONTAR-
GET (Ongoing Telmisartan Alone and in Combinationwith Ramipril Global Endpoin tT r i a l ) ,i n v e s t i g a t o r s
showed similar bene ﬁts on MACE with the angiotensin-
receptor blocker telmisartan.
11In an observational
study of patients with CLTI by Armstrong et al,12use of
ACE inhibitors or angiotensin-receptor blockers was
associated with a signi ﬁcantly lower rate of MACE (HR:
0.76 [95% CI: 0.58 –0.99]; P¼0.04) and overall mortality
rate (HR: 0.71 [95% CI: 0.53 –0.95]; P¼0.02). No associa-
tion was noted with MALE, including major amputa-tion.
12Although no single antihy pertensive medication
a p p e a r st ob em o r ee f f e c t i v ea tt r e a t i n gh y p e r t e n s i o ni npatients with PAD, cardiovascular bene ﬁts are shown
with the use of ACE inhibitors or angiotensin-receptor
blockers, and these agents should be ﬁrst line for pa-
tients with PAD and hypertension.
5.4. Smoking Cessation for PAD
Recommendations for Smoking Cessation for PAD
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1A1. Patients with PAD who smoke cigarettes or use any other forms of tobacco should be advised at every
v i s i tt oq u i to re n c o u r a g e d to maintain cessation.1-3
1A2. Patients with PAD who smoke cigarettes or use any other forms of tobacco should be assisted in
developing a plan for quitting that includes pharmaco therapy (ie, varenicline, b upropion, and/or nicotine
replacement therapies) combined with counselin g, and/or referral to a smoking cessation program.4-9
1 B-NR3. Patients with PAD should be advised to avoid expo sure to secondhand tobacco smoke in all indoor or
enclosed spaces, including work, home, tran sportation vehicles, and public places.10-14JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2529

Synopsis
Cigarette smoking and other forms of tobacco use are
strong, dose-responsive risk factors for PAD develop-ment.
15-17Quitting smoking and other forms of tobacco is
important for reducing the risk of developing PAD, the
progression of established PAD, and the risk of limb-
related events and death. The continual encouragementby health care professionals of those they are treating forPAD is important in the process of quitting and sustain-ing smoking cessation. Both pharmacological andbehavioral-based strategies, alone or in combination,increase the cessation rate in those with PAD.
4,6,18
However, these strategies a re underutilized. In addition
to quitting, the avoidance of secondhand smoke is rec-
ommended to reduce MACE in those with establishedPAD. The use of electronic nicotine delivery systemsshould be discouraged in general and discouraged as atransitional tool from cigarettes to smoking cessation,because data are inadequate on the potential healtheffects.
19
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Overall, in the United States, 68% of adult smokers
want to quit, 55% report attempting to quit, but only7% are successful. Sparse direct evidence existsregarding the association o f electronic nicotine de-
livery systems and cannabis for the development and
progression of PAD.
20Long-term water pipe use (ie,
hookah) increases risk factors associated with PAD andCAD.
21Observational studies suggest that smoking
cessation is associated with lower rates of MALE,including bypass graft failure and amputation, as wellas death in patients with PAD.
22-25The risk of PAD
development remains >2 times higher than that of
never-smokers for up to 10 to 20 years after quitting
and does not return to the risk of a nonsmoker until
after 30 years after quitting.17Clinician advice and
encouragement increase cessation rates, which sup-ports simple provider-based measures as a componentof smoking cessation programs.
1-3
2. Coordinated smoking cessation interventions that
combine nonpharmacological and pharmacologicalapproaches can increase cessation rates by 2 to 3 times
that of self-quit attempts.
10An RCT of a follow-up
program and smoking cessation medications providedto hospitalized patients, including those with PAD,showed a modest increase in cessation rates.
6,18Phar-
macotherapy is more effective when combined withcounseling.
26-28In an RCT of patients with PAD, a
comprehensive smoking cessation program combiningcounseling and pharmacological agents increased the
rates of smoking cessation to 21%, compared with 7%
with standard advice alone.
4Three U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA)-approved pharmacological ap-proaches (ie, varenicline, bupropion, and nicotinereplacement therapy) used alone or in combination allincrease smoking cessation rates.
3,5,7Two meta-
analyses of RCTs of smoking cessation medicationsshowed no evidence of increase in MACE with nicotine
replacement, bupropion, or varenicline.
8,9Emerging
data have demonstrated that electronic nicotine de-livery systems have a positive effect on smokingcessation rates.
29-31However, long-term health-related
outcomes (MACE and MALE) with use of electronicnicotine delivery systems have not been evaluated.
3
Additional clinical investigation of electronic nicotinedelivery systems in patients with PAD is needed to
e s t a b l i s ht h e i rs a f e t ya n de f ﬁcacy for smoking cessa-
tion in this patient population.
Despite multiple available tools, smoking cessationsupport strategies are underutilized among patientswith PAD.
32Clinicians caring for patients with PAD
should include smoking cessation in the treatment planand prescribe therapy based on current guidelines,including a 2018 ACC expert consensus decision
pathway.
33
3. Secondhand smoke contains nicotine, ﬁne particulates,
a n dt o x i cc h e m i c a l s ,a n di sa s s o c i a t e dw i t ha nincreased risk of all-cause death, stroke, and CVD.
10-12
Moderate-quality evidence has associated secondhand
smoke exposure with the development of PAD.13,14
Emissions from electronic nicotine delivery systems
(ie, e-cigarettes, vaping) contain nicotine, particulates,and other toxic chemicals, but at a lower amount thantobacco smoke.
19,20,34The effects of avoiding passive
smoke and electronic nicotine delivery system emis-sion exposure on MALE among patients with PAD areunknown.
20Observational studies have shown lower
r a t e so fM A C Ei nt h eg e n e r a lp o p u l a t i o na f t e re n a c t -
ment of smokefree legislation, although the effect of
such interventions on limb-related events remainsunknown.
35Gornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042530

5.5. Diabetes Management for PAD
Synopsis
Diabetes is an important risk factor for development of
PAD and for progression to CLTI. A guideline-based pro-gram of pharmacological and nonpharmacological thera-
pies (including weight management) should be
implemented for patients wi th diabetes and underlying
PAD. Updated care standards, including recommenda-tions for approach to pharmacological therapy for patientswith diabetes, have been published and are beyond thescope of this document.
17Recent RCTs have demon-
strated reduction in MACE among patients with PAD andtype 2 diabetes treated with glucagon-like peptide-1 ago-
nists or sodium glucose cotransporter-2 inhibitors.
1-12
Adequate glycemic control in this patient population has
been associated with improved outcomes in observationalstudies, particularly among patients with CLTI.
13-16 ,18,19A
coordinated effort among c linicians is essential, and a
diabetes care plan should be customized to each indi-vidual depending on clinical status and risk factors.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Glucagon-like peptide-1 agonists (liraglutide and sem-
aglutide) and SGLT-2 inhibitors (canagli ﬂozin, dapa-
gliﬂozin, and empagli ﬂozin) have been demonstrated
to reduce MACE in RCTs of patients with type 2 dia-betes and CVD, including underlying PAD.
1,2,7,8,10At
baseline, 12.5% of patients in the LEADER (LiraglutideEffect and Action in Diabetes: Evaluation of Cardio-
vascular Outcome Results) trial and 13.7% of patients in
SUSTAIN-6 (Trial to Evaluate Cardiovascular and OtherLong-term Outcomes With Semaglutide in SubjectsWith Type 2 Diabetes) had PAD.
1,2In subgroup ana-
lyses, the presence of PAD was associated withincreased risk of MACE in both the LEADER trial andSUSTAIN-6, and the use of a glucagon-like peptide-1agonist was associated with reduced MACE.
6In the
LEADER trial, at a median of 3.8 years follow-up, theprimary composite MACE outcome occurred in 13.0% of
patients in the placebo group compared with 14.9% ofpatients in the liraglutide group (HR: 0.87; P<0.001).
1
In SUSTAIN-6, at a median of 2.1 years of follow-up,
the primary composite MACE outcome, which
included ﬁrst occurrence of cardiovascular death,
nonfatal MI, or nonfatal stroke, occurred in 6.6% ofpatients in the semaglutide group and 8.9% of patients
in the placebo group (HR: 0.74; P<0.001).
2These ben-
eﬁts do not appear to be related to a class effect given
that ﬁndings were not replicated in studies dedicated
to other glucagon-like peptide-1 agonists, including
lixisenatide, exenatide, and dulaglutide.3-5Study of
the glucagon-like peptide-1 agonist tirzepatide in pa-tients with diabetes and CVD is ongoing.
20Multiple
RCTs have also demonstrated bene ﬁti nt e r m so f
reduction of MACE with use of SGLT-2 inhibitors(canagli ﬂozin, dapagli ﬂozin, and empagli ﬂozin) in pa-
tients with type 2 diabetes and underlying PAD. InEMPA-REG OUTCOME (Empagli ﬂozin Cardiovascular
O u t c o m eE v e n tT r i a li nT y p e2D i a b e t e sM e l l i t u sP a -
tients), 21% of patients had known PAD.
7Empagli ﬂozin
was associated with a reduction in cardiovasculardeath, nonfatal MI, and nonfatal stroke (10.5% vs12.1%; P¼0.04). Similarly, in CANVAS (CANagli ﬂozin
cardiovascular Assessment Study), 21% of patients hadknown PAD, and canagli ﬂozin was associated with a
reduction in cardiovascular death, nonfatal MI, or
nonfatal stroke (HR: 0.86; P<0.01).
10In the DECLARE-
TIMI 58 (Dapagli ﬂozin Effect on CardiovascuLAR
Events-Thrombolysis In Myocardial Infarction 58)study, dapagli ﬂozin was not associated with signi ﬁcant
reduction in MACE; however, there was a signi ﬁcant
reduction in cardiovascular death or hospitalization forheart failure (4.9% versus 5.8%; P¼0.005).
8The
r e d u c t i o ni nM A C Ee v e n t sd i dn o ta p p e a rt oe x t e n dt o
ertugli ﬂozin in the VERTIS CV trial (CardiovascularRecommendations for Diabetes Management for PAD
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1A1. In patients with PAD and type 2 diabetes, use of glucagon-like peptide –1 agonists (liraglutide and sem-
aglutide) and sodium-glucose cotransp orter-2 (SGLT-2) inhibitors (canagli ﬂozin, dapagli ﬂozin, and
empagli ﬂozin) are effective to reduce the risk of MACE.1-12
1 C-EO2. In patients with PAD, management of diabetes shou ld be coordinated among members of the health care
team.
2b B-NR3. In patients with PAD and diabetes, glycemic control may be bene ﬁcial to improve limb outcomes.13-16JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2531

Outcomes Following Ertugli ﬂozin Treatment in Type 2
Diabetes Mellitus Participants With Vascular Disease).9
Notably, the safety of canagli ﬂozin in patients with
PAD has been evaluated by the FDA, given an increasedrate of associated lower extremity amputations in the
CANVAS trial (6.3 versus 3.4 placebo per 1,000 patient
years; P<0.001).
10Most amputations were minor and
o c c u r r e da tt h et o eo rm e t a t a r s a ll e v e l( 7 1 % ) .10How-
ever, these ﬁndings were not reproduced in the
CREDENCE (Canagli ﬂozin and Renal Events in Diabetes
with Established Nephropathy Clinical Evaluation) trialor a more recently published systematic review andmeta-analysis of 30 trials.
11,12As u b g r o u pa n a l y s i s
of patients with PAD at baseline (n ¼1,462; 20.8%) in
EMPA-REG OUTCOME showed superior limb survival inpatients treated with empagli ﬂozin versus placebo.
7
Because of the con ﬂicting subsequent data, the black
box warning associated with canagli ﬂozin was
removed by the FDA in August 2020.21For patients
with PAD who have heart failure, RCT data and clinicalpractice guidelines further support the use of SGLT2
inhibitors to prevent MACE.
22Overall, these data pro-
vide robust support for use of these agents to reduceMACE among patients with PAD and type 2 diabetes.
2. Diabetes is associated with an increased risk of PAD,
with an odds ratio ranging from 1.89 to 4.05.
23In the
EUCLID trial, of the 13,885 patients enrolled, 5,345patients (38.5%) had diabetes.
18It has been estimated
that approximately 50% of patients with CLTI have
diabetes.24In patients with known PAD, the presence
of diabetes confers increased risk for MACE and MALEoutcomes, including progression to CLTI, amputation,and death.
25In a subgroup analysis of patients with
diabetes in the EUCLID trial, a 14.2% increased relativerisk of MACE (95% CI: 1.09-1.2; P<0.0001) was observed
with every 1% increase in hemoglobin A1c, suggestingan opportunity for improved glycemic control to
improve outcomes in this patient population.
18Man-
agement of diabetes should include a coordinated careplan among clinicians to address diet, exercise, weightmanagement, pharmacotherapy for glycemic control,management of other cardiovascular risk factors, andfoot care and ulcer prevention.3. Poor glycemic control is a kn own risk factor for diabetic
neuropathy, which is associated with diabetic foot ulcerdevelopment, a cardinal manifestation of CLTI.
26,27
Multiple population-based and clinical observational
studies have demonstrated an association between
incrementally higher hemoglobin A1c values and MALE,
particularly amputation, among patients with PAD anddiabetes. In the Strong Heart study, in a cohort of 1,974patients who had diabetes, patients with PAD and ahemoglobin A1c level of <6.5% had a lower age-
adjusted odds ratio of major amputation during longi-tudinal follow-up compared with those with a hemo-globin A1c level of 6.5% to 9.5% and hemoglobin A1c
level of >9.5%.
19Lane et al performed a meta-analysis
of patients with diabetic foot ulcers and found a lowerrisk of amputation associated with a hemoglobin A1clevel of <8%.
13Preprocedural glycemic control has also
been associated with outcom es after revascularization
for PAD. In a large observational study from the U.S.Department of Veterans Affairs database (N ¼26,799),
poor glycemic control, as measured by preprocedural
hemoglobin A1c levels, was associated with increased
risk of MALE during longitudinal follow-up, includingamputation, among individuals with PAD undergoingendovascular or surgical revascularization.
16In an
observational study of 278 patients with CLTI under-going endovascular revascularization, diabetes withpoor glycemic control (de ﬁned as hemoglobin A1c
level$6.8%) was associated with risk of major ampu-
tation.
14Similarly, in a registry-based series of 309
infrapopliteal endovascular procedures performed inpatients with PAD and either CLTI or ALI, a preproce-dural median fasting blood glucose $144 mg/dL was
associated with a higher rate of major amputation andlower primary patency at the interventional site.
15
Although further study of the impact of glycemic con-trol on limb outcomes is warranted, these data support
diabetes management as a component of GDMT for
patients with PAD.
5.6. Other Medical Therapies for Cardiovascular Risk Reduction
in PAD
Recommendations for Other Medical Therapies for Cardiovascular Risk Reduction in PAD
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 C-LD1. Patients with PAD should receive an annual in ﬂuenza vaccination.1-5
1 C-EO2. Patients with PAD should receive the severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2)
vaccination sequence, inc luding the booster(s).Gornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042532

Synopsis
In addition to other elements of GDMT for patients with
PAD previously outlined (see Section 5.1 ,“Antiplatelet
and Antithrombotic Therapy for PAD, ”Section 5.2 ,“Lipid-
Lowering Therapy for PAD, ”Section 5.3 ,“Antihyperten-
sive Therapy for PAD, ”Section 5.4 ,“Smoking Cessation
for PAD, ”and Section 5.5 ,“Diabetes Management for
PAD ”), data also support the consideration of other
medical therapies, including vaccination against in ﬂu-
enza,1-5the SARS-CoV-2 vaccination sequence, and a
focus on healthy diet,6-15for cardiovascular risk reduction
in patients with PAD. No compelling evidence exists to
support the use of vitamin su pplementation (B-complex
or vitamin D)16-18 ,21-25or chelation therapy to reduce risk
of MACE in patients with PAD.19,20
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Observational studies ha ve shown reduced cardiovas-
cular event rates among patients with CVD who have
received an in ﬂuenza vaccination.1RCTs that enrolled
patients with CAD, both with stable disease and afteran acute coronary syndrome, have shown a bene ﬁto f
an in ﬂuenza vaccination on the prevention of cardio-
vascular events, particularly coronary ischemicevents.
2-5Although these trials did not speci ﬁcally
enroll participants with PAD, approximately one-thirdof patients with PAD have concomitant CAD,
26,27and
inﬂuenza vaccination is generally recommended for
secondary prevention among patients with non-coronary CVD.
1
2. Although data supporting the use of SARS-CoV-2
vaccination in patients with CVD are emerging, obser-vational studies have suggested that patients withcardiovascular comorbidities such as PAD have ahigher risk for hospitalization, thrombotic events, and
d e a t hw i t hS A R S - C o V - 2i n f e c t i o n .
28,29In patients at
high risk for complications from SARS-CoV-2, vacci-nation is recommended. The U.S. Centers for DiseaseControl and Prevention has published updated rec-ommendations for SARS-CoV-2 vaccination foradults.
303. Healthy nutrition is important for preventing the
development of atherosclerotic CVD, including PAD, aswell as reducing MACE in high-risk patients.
6,7Many
studies of different dietary interventions in CVD have
focused on primary prevention of cardiovascularevents in high-risk populations or patients with CAD.Reductions in blood pressure and cardiovascularevents were observed with dietary sodium reduction inthe DASH (Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension)trial and in TOHP (Trials of Hypertension Preven-tion).
8,9In the PREDIMED (Prevención con Dieta
Mediterránea) study, patients randomized to a Medi-
terranean diet supplemented with extra-virgin olive oilor nuts had a signi ﬁcantly lower risk of MACE
compared with a control diet in patients at high car-diovascular risk but without established atheroscle-rotic CVD.
10In an exploratory analysis, both
Mediterranean diet arms were associated with lowerrisk of PAD.
11A secondary analysis of PREDIMED also
found a mortality bene ﬁt associated with a “pro-vege-
tarian ”food pattern (more vegetable consumption and
less animal, egg, ﬁsh, dairy, or meat product con-
sumption).12Observational data also support an asso-
ciation between a Mediterra nean diet and reduced risk
of incident PAD.13In the Lyon Diet Heart Study, a
Mediterranean diet compared with a Western diet waseffective for secondary prevention of recurrent car-
diovascular events in patients presenting with a ﬁrst
MI.
14A systematic review of diet and PAD has recently
been published and further supports the need forfurther study, including RCTs, of the potential bene ﬁt
of the Mediterranean diet.
15
4. Although patients with PAD have been shown to have
increased plasma homocysteine levels compared withpatients without PAD, no evidence exists that B-com-
plex vitamin supplementation improves their clinical
outcomes.
16-18The HOPE-2 (Heart Outcomes Prevention
Evaluation-2) trial randomized 5,522 patients withatherosclerotic CVD, including symptomatic PAD, ordiabetes with additional ri sk factors to receive folic
acid/vitamin B6/vitamin B12 or placebo.
16Despite2a B-R3. In patients at high cardiovascular risk, a diet emphasizing intake of vegetables, fruits, legumes, nuts,
whole grains, and ﬁsh can be bene ﬁcial for reducing the risk of developing PAD and the risk of MACE.6-15
3: No Bene ﬁt B-R4. In patients with PAD, B-complex vitamin supple mentation to lower homocysteine levels is not bene ﬁcial
for prevention of MACE.16-18
3: No Bene ﬁt B-R5. In patients with PAD, chelation therapy (eg, EDTA) is not bene ﬁcial for prevention of MACE.19,20
3: No Bene ﬁt B-R6. In patients with PAD, vitamin D supplementation is not bene ﬁcial for prevention of MACE.21-25JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2533

Recommendations for Medications for Leg Symptoms in Chronic Symptomatic PAD
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
Cilostazol
1A1. In patients with claudication, cilostazol is recommended to improve leg symptoms and increase walking
distance.1-4
2b B-R2. In patients with PAD, cilostazol may be useful to r educe restenosis after endovascular therapy for
femoropopliteal disease.5-7
3: Harm C-LD3. In patients with PAD and congestive heart failure of any severity, cilostazol should not be administered.8-10
Pentoxifylline
3: No Bene ﬁt B-R4. In patients with chronic symptomatic PAD, pe ntoxifylline is not recommended for treatment of
claudication.11,12
Chelation Therapy
3: No Bene ﬁt B-R5. In patients with chronic symptomatic PAD, chel ation therapy is not recommended for treatment of
claudication.13lowering of homocysteine levels in the vitamin supple-
mentation arm, no improvement was observed in theprimary MACE endpoint of cardiovascular death, MI, orstroke.
5. In a Cochrane review of 5 studies of chelation for
atherosclerotic CVD, including 3 that enrolled patients
with PAD, chelation therapy showed no signi ﬁcant
difference in symptoms (maximal and pain-freewalking distance) compared with placebo.
19MACE,
with the exception of stroke, was not examined inchelation studies in patien ts with PAD; no difference in
stroke was shown in patients treated with chelationversus placebo.
19As u b g r o u pa n a l y s i so fT A C T( T r i a lt o
Assess Chelation Therapy) among post-MI patients with
diabetes and PAD showed a signi ﬁcant reduction in a
composite endpoint of MACE and all-cause death.20
Prospective evaluation of this post hoc ﬁnding is
warranted.
6. Lower levels of vitamin D have been variably asso-
ciated with increased risk of PAD.25In NHANES,patients with PAD had lower plasma levels of
vitamin D than patients without PAD,24and data
from the ARIC (Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities)study showed an association between lower vitaminD levels and 30% increased risk of incident PAD.
23In
contrast, baseline hypovitaminosis D was not pre-
dictive of development of PAD in an elderly cohort.22
Vitamin D supplementation for prevention of CVDhas been a subject of interest and has been mainlystudied in patients at higher risk based on age orcomorbidities, although not speci ﬁcally in the pres-
ence of PAD.
21In a meta-analysis of 21 RCTs
including 83,291 high-risk patients, supplementation
with vitamin D showed no bene ﬁtf o rr e d u c t i o ni n
MACE or all-cause death.21
5.7. Medications for Leg Symptoms in Chronic Symptomatic
PAD
Synopsis
In patients with chronic symptomatic PAD and claudi-
cation, medical therapy with cilostazol has been shown toreduce symptoms of claudication and improve walkingdistance.
1-4In limited studies, cilostazol has also been
shown to reduce restenosis after endovascular therapy forfemoropopliteal stenosis and may therefore be useful in
patients undergoing such therapy.
5-7Cilostazol is aphosphodiesterase III inhibitor; previous evaluation of
oral milrinone —also a phosphodiesterase inhibitor —was
shown to increase the mortality rate in patients with se-vere chronic heart failure. As a result, cilostazol is labeledas contraindicated in patients with congestive heart fail-ure.
8-10Other medical therapies, including pentoxifylline
and chelation therapy, have not been shown to provide
bene ﬁt in terms of leg symptoms for individuals withGornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042534

Recommendations for Preventive Foot Care for PAD
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 C-LD1. In patients with PAD, providing general preventive f oot self-care education to patients and their family
members and support persons is recommended.1-7
1 C-EO2. In patients with PAD, foot inspection by a clinician at every visit is recommended.
1 C-LD3. In patients with PAD at high risk for ulcers and amputation ( Table 12 ), therapeutic footwear is
recommended.8,9
1 C-EO4. In patients with PAD, a comprehensive foot evaluation ( Table 13 ) should be performed at least annually to
identify risk factors for ulcers and amputation.
2a B-NR5. In patients with PAD, referral to a footcare specialist , when available, is reasonable for ongoing preventive
care and longitudinal surveillance.10-16symptomatic stable PAD and are therefore not recom-
mended.11-13
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. In a Cochrane review of 15 double-blind RCTs with 3,718
participants, cilostazol was associated with improve-
ment in claudication symptoms but no changes in car-diovascular deaths or QOL compared with placebo.
1In a
longitudinal prospective registry, cilostazol signi ﬁ-
cantly improved Peripheral Artery Questionnaire (PAQ)outcomes and physical limitation score.
2In a network
meta-analysis, cilostazol improved maximal walking
distance and ABI.3In an observational study, cilostazol
improved QOL and lower limb functional status
assessed by questionnaires.4When considering cil-
o s t a z o lt h e r a p y ,p o t e n t i a l adverse effects, risks, and
cost should be weighed against potential bene ﬁt.
Adverse effects include headache, diarrhea, dizziness,and palpitations.
8In 1 case series, 20% of patients who
were prescribed cilostazol for claudication dis-continued it within 3 months.
14I tm a yb ev a l u a b l et o
assess patient tolerance of cilostazol at 2 to 4 weeks and
to evaluate bene ﬁt within 3 to 6 months to determine
whether long-term therapy will be bene ﬁcial.
2. In addition to demonstrated bene ﬁt for patients with
claudication, recent data h ave suggested potential
bene ﬁt of cilostazol in prevention of in-stent restenosis
in patients who have undergone stenting of the femo-ropopliteal segment. In 1 blinded RCT of cilostazol
versus nonplacebo control, cilostazol improved primary
patency at 3 years after bare-metal femoropoplitealstent treatment.
5In a subgroup analysis of an RCT of a
paclitaxel-eluting stent, c ilostazol reduced the rate of
restenosis at 1 year after stent treatment of femo-ropopliteal stenosis.
7In a meta-analysis of 3 RCTs and5 observational studies with 3,846 patients, compared
with placebo after femoropopliteal endovascular ther-apy, cilostazol improved primary patency, target lesionrevascularization, and MAL E, including major ampu-
tation at a median of 12.5 months follow-up.
6
3. Cilostazol is a phosphodiesterase III inhibitor; studies
of another phosphodiesterase inhibitor (ie, oral mil-rinone) have shown excess mo rtality in patients with
heart failure with reduced ejection fraction treatedwith these agents.
9Out of concern for a potential
class effect, the package insert for cilostazol statesthat it is contraindicated in patients with heart fail-ure of any severity, although evidence is limited in
patients with heart failure with preserved ejection
fraction.
8-10
4. In a multicenter RCT of pentoxifylline, cilostazol, or
placebo for patients with moderate-to-severe claudi-cation, no difference was observed between pentox-ifylline and placebo in the primary endpoint of maximalwalking distance.
12In a Cochrane review of 24 studies
with 3,377 participants, large variability was observed
in study design and results between individual studies,
and therefore the assessment of effectiveness was un-certain.
11Pentoxifylline was shown to be generally well
tolerated.11
5. In a Cochrane review of chelation therapy (eg, EDTA)
that included 2 clinical trials with walking endpoints inpatients with PAD, chelat ion therapy showed no sig-
niﬁcant improvement in claudication symptoms
(maximal and pain-free walking distance) compared
with placebo.
13
5.8. Preventive Foot Care for PADJACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2535

Synopsis
PAD increases the risk of foot ulcers, infection, and
amputation, and carries a 40% rate of death at 5 yearsa f t e raf o o tu l c e rh a sd e v e l o p e d .
6,17T h ep r e s e n c eo ff o o t
ulcers is also associated with anxiety, depression, andreduced QOL.
4,5Risk factors for developing foot ulcers is
presented in Table 12 . Diabetes is a particularly important
risk factor for development of ulcers; between 19% and
34% of patients with diabetes are estimated to develop
foot ulcers in their lifetime.6Foot care is an important
component of care for patients with PAD ( Figure 4 ), and
patients should have their bare feet routinely inspectedby clinicians during of ﬁce visits. When available, referral
to a footcare specialist is reasonable for ongoing foot ex-aminations and surveillance. Vascular specialists can helpprovide patients with PAD with ongoing preventive care
and lifelong surveillance and perform an annual
comprehensive foot evaluation ( Table 13 ). Wearing ther-
apeutic footwear can reduce the risk of foot ulcers in pa-tients with PAD and severe neuropathy, foot deformities,ulcer or Charcot history, callus formation, or history ofamputation. Self-foot care can prevent foot ulcers andconsists of nail and skin care, washing and drying the feetdaily, doing foot exercises, protecting feet from heat and
cold, avoid walking barefoot, and wearing socks and
appropriately ﬁtting shoes.
1
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Education on foot self-care for patients with PAD and
their family members and other support persons isimportant. Dry, cracked skin and corn or callus for-mation are precursors of foot ulcers, and patient edu-cation regarding foot care has been shown to reducet h eo c c u r r e n c eo ft h e s el e s i o n s .
2Self-foot care con-
sisting of nail and skin care, washing and drying thefeet daily, performing foot exercises (eg, heel liftswhile standing, ankle pumps, and rolling the bottom ofthe foot on a tennis ball), as well as protective mea-sures such as protecting the feet from heat or cold,avoiding going barefoot, and wearing socks andappropriately ﬁtting shoes can be bene ﬁcial in pre-
venting foot ulcers.
1Visual impairment affects a pa-
tient ’s ability to perform self-foot care.3Teaching
patients self-examination of the feet with methodssuch as using a mirror to re ﬂect their own feet and
enlisting family members and other support persons infoot care education is important. Resources for patientTABLE 12Risk Factors for Development of Foot Ulcers or
Amputation Among Patients With PAD17,21
History of previous foot ulcer(s) or amputation (minor or major)
Charcot or other foot deformitiesDiabetes with poor glycemic controlCKD (especially if ESKD)Peripheral neuropathy (especially with loss of protective sensation)
Corns or calluses on the feet (considered preulcerous lesions in patients with
PAD)
Ongoing smoking
CKD indicates chronic kidney disease; ESKD, end-stage kidney disease; and PAD, pe-
ripheral artery disease.TABLE 13Components of a Comprehensive Foot
Evaluation for Patients With PAD17,21
History
Previous foot ulcer(s) or CLTI, amputation, Charcot deformity, callusesCurrent symptoms of PAD or CLTI: claudication or other leg fatigue with
walking, rest pain, foot ulcers
Lower extremity revascularization (endovascular or surgical procedures)Cigarette or other tobacco use (current, past)DiabetesRetinopathy or visual impairmentCKD
Symptoms of neuropathy (eg, pain, burning, numbness in feet)
History of other CVD (eg, CAD, heart failure, cerebrovascular disease)
Physical examination
Evaluate skin integrity, including presence of any ulcers, calluses, or corns.
Visual inspection includes the whole foot and in between all toes
Examine for foot deformity (eg, bunion, hammertoe or claw toe, abnormal foot
arch, Charcot deformity)
Perform neurological assessment: 10-g mono ﬁlament testing with at least
1 other measurement: pinprick, temperature, or vibration
Evaluate (palpate) pulses in the legs and feet
Other assessments
Footwear: Is it ill- ﬁtting, inadequate, or is there lack of footwear?
Does patient have poor foot hygiene (eg, improperly cut toenails, unwashed
feet, super ﬁcial fungal infection, or unclean socks)?
Does the patient have physical limitations that may hinder foot self-care (eg,
visual impairment, obesity, inability to reach feet)?
Does the patient know the components of and perform self-foot care?
Modiﬁed with permission from Armstrong et al17and Schaper et al.21
CAD indicates coronary artery disease; CKD, chronic kidney disease; CLTI, chronic
limb-threatening ischemia; CVD, cardiovascular disease, and PAD, peripheral artery
disease.Gornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042536

education for self-foot care have been developed by
the American Diabetes Association, U.S. Centers forDisease Control and Prevention, and the NationalInstitute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Dis-ease.
18-20Links for patient education for self-foot care
from these organizations ar e available in the reference
section.
2. A proactive approach to prevention of foot ulcers
through ongoing foot surveillance and patient self-footcare education is important, particularly among those
with risk factors for ulceration ( Table 12 ). In patients
with PAD, especially those at highest risk for ulcers,foot inspection at each of ﬁce visit is important. Shoes
and socks are removed for visual inspection of the bare
feet. The International Working Group on the DiabeticFoot guidelines propose the frequency of foot inspec-
tion (screening examination) depending on risk of ul-cers: 1) low risk: annual foot screening; 2) moderaterisk: assess feet every 3 to 6 months; and 3) high risk:assess feet every 1 to 3 months.
21
3 .T h ep r e s e n c eo ff o o td e f o r m i t i e si sar i s kf a c t o rf o rt h e
development of foot ulcers among patients with PAD
(Table 12 ). These deformities, which include bunions
(hallux valgus), hammertoe, claw toe, ﬂatfoot (pes
planus), severe high-arch foot (pes cavus), Charcotfoot, or the arthritic foot, can lead to foot ulcers causedby joint immobility, friction, or pressure. Patients withthese types of foot deformities should be referred to apodiatrist for further evaluation and care.
8According
to updated guidelines from the International Working
Group on the Diabetic Foot, foot deformities place thefoot at moderate to high risk for foot ulcer develop-ment, and these patients can bene ﬁt from a referral to a
therapeutic footwear specialist. Appropriate thera-peutic footwear can prevent many diabetic foot com-plications.
22Therapeutic footwear does not always
imply a prescription shoe but one that is recommended
by a specialist who understands the type or shape of
t h em o s tp r o t e c t i v es h o ef o rt h ei n d i v i d u a lt h a t ﬁts
properly, reduces plantar pressure, and can help pre-vent a foot ulcer in patients with diabetes who are atrisk.
8Home foot temperature monitoring to identify
local increases in skin tempe rature and areas at risk for
ulceration has emerged as another potential tool toreduce the incidence of foot ulcers in high-risk pa-
tients, although additio nal studies are needed.
9,234. Foot ulcers and amputation caused by PAD or diabetic
neuropathy are major causes of death and potentialmortality in patients with these conditions. Knowledgeof and early recognition of the risk factors for foot ulcerdevelopment ( Table 12 ) can be used to identify patients
at highest risk to implement intervention to prevent
foot ulcers and amputations (eg, therapeutic footwear).Thus, a comprehensive foot evaluation, which is amore in-depth assessment than the routine foot in-
spection, is recommended at least annually for pa-tients with PAD ( Table 13 ).
6,17,21This recommendation
is based on expert opinion. A 2015 Cochrane databasereview of 6 studies of complex education-oriented
preventive interventions versus usual care of less-
intensive education reported insuf ﬁcient evidence
that the education-oriente d interventions improved
outcomes in terms of foot ulcers and lower extremityamputations, primarily because of heterogeneity of thestudies, intervention, and outcomes, and small num-ber of events.
7
5. Because of the complexity of PAD, a multispecialty care
team approach promotes collaboration and avoids
duplication of care in regard to risk factor manage-ment, foot care, and revascularization and allows forcoordinated management to improve outcomes forthese patients.
10-14 ,24,25For preventive foot care in
particular, the patient and their family or caregiversare important members of this care team. Engagementof foot care specialists (eg, podiatrists) for longitudinal
follow-up is recommended by the International Work-
ing Group on the Diabetic Foot guidelines for patientsat moderate or high risk of fo ot ulcers and is reasonable
for all patients with PAD when available.
16In a study of
Medicare claims data, patients with diabetes receivingcare from a multispecialty care team that included afoot specialist had reduced rates of lower extremityamputation.
15
6. EXERCISE THERAPY FOR PAD
Structured exercise therapy is an important component ofcare for patients with chronic symptomatic PAD toimprove functional status, walking performance, and QOL(Figure 4 ). Mechanisms of improvement in walking per-
formance resulting from exe rcise training in those with
chronic symptomatic PAD are multifactorial and not fullyJACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2537

understood.1,2Predominant mechanisms include im-
provements in skeletal muscle strength and endurance(eg, mitochondrial density and activity, muscle ﬁber ad-
aptations), capabilities that are known to occur in most
healthy and chronic diseased individuals. There is also
evidence of improvements in endothelial function, po-tential angiogenesis, improved blood distribution ef ﬁ-
ciency leading to potential calf blood ﬂow increases, and a
reduced local in ﬂammatory response. Evidence does not
show an increase in either microvascular or macro-vascular blood ﬂow after exercise training despite signif-
icant functional improvement.
3,4Although someevidence suggests local in ﬂammatory adverse effects
related to ischemia reperfusion injury, the evidence isstrong that intermittent walking to mild or moderate painis required to maximize the aforementioned adaptations
to maximally improve walking performance.
5
Although the evidence base is strongest for supervised
exercise therapy (SET), other forms of structuredcommunity-based exercise programs, including home-based exercise, have been de veloped, and recent studies
support their use in this patient population.
5-15The types
of structured exercise programs for PAD are de ﬁned in
Table 14 .TABLE 14 Structured Exercise Programs for PAD
Supervised Exercise Therapy5,7,16-28 ,42,52,53
nPrimarily focuses on intermittent walking exercise on a treadmill, interspersed with rest periods when pain becomes moderate or severe.
nProgram takes place in a hospital or outpatient facility and is often placed w ithin a cardiac rehabilitation program setting; can be standalone if nec essary.
nProgram is directly supervised by quali ﬁed health care professional(s); generally clinical exercise p hysiologists or nurses with ex ercise training experience.
nTraining is performed for a minimum of 30-45 min per 60-min session. Supe rvised sessions are performed at least 3 times/wk for a minimum of 12 wk.
nTraining involves intermittent bouts of walking to moderate-to-maximum c laudication pain or discomfort, alternating with periods of rest, with
incremental increases as function and symptoms improve. Goal is to p rogress to 30-45 min of active walking exercise during each session.
nNontreadmill modalities (eg, stationary bicycle) can used when appropri ate and continually assessed to deter mine when or if the patient can use a
treadmill.
nSupervised exercise therapy is a covered bene ﬁt by Medicare and most commercial insurances.
Structured Community-Based Exercise Program5,6,8,9,12,15,19,57,63-66
nProgram takes place in the personal setting (eg, home, community, n eighborhood) of the patient rather than in a clinical setting.
nQuali ﬁed health care professional(s) prescribe an exercis e regimen similar to that of a supervised program.
nProgram is self-directed with the guidance of quali ﬁed health care professional(s) and is generally walking-based.
nPatient counseling ensures understanding of how to be gin and maintain the program and how to progress the dif ﬁculty of the walking (by increasing
distance or speed).
nProgram may incorporate behavioral change techniques, delivered by in -person or virtual health coaching or the use of activity monitors.
nProgram may include periodic supervised exercise sessions to assess prog ress, reinforce adherence, and make exercise prescription alterations wh en
appropriate.
Structured exercise programs are planned by quali ﬁed health care professional(s) and provide recommendations for exercise training with a goal of improving functional status over
time. Structured exercise programs for PAD are classi ﬁed as supervised exercise therapy or a structured community-based exercise program. Structured community-based exercise
programs include home-based programs. Modi ﬁed with permission from Gerhard-Herman et al.67Copyright 2017 American Heart Association, Inc., and American College of Cardiology
Foundation.
PAD indicates peripheral artery disease.Gornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042538

Synopsis
Strong, high-quality, and consistent data support the
use of SET to improve functional status, walking perfor-
mance, and QOL in patients with chronic symptomatic
PAD. This includes those who are being considered forrevascularization as exercise improvements are at least aseffective as revascularization.
17,18,40Medicare and most
commercial insurance companies now cover SET for pa-tients with claudication. SET can be delivered in a clinicofﬁce space or hospital, although cardiac rehabilitation
programs are considered an ideal setting. Some third-
party payers may require SET to be performed in a hos-
pital outpatient setting. When revascularization is per-formed, referral to SET can result in optimization ofbene ﬁts.
39
Although most randomized clinical trials have
compared SET to control or usual care conditions, theevidence supporting a structured community-based ex-ercise program (including home-based programs) con-
tinues to grow. A 2019 meta-analysis including 11 trials
and 807 patients showed that, overall, these programsimprove walking performance and physical activityc o m p a r e dw i t hu s u a lc a r e .
11Two additional RCTs support
the ef ﬁcacy of structured community-based exercise
programs to improve function al status among patientswith chronic symptomatic PAD.5,15Similarly, increasing
evidence exists that alternative forms of exercise that do
not involve treadmill walking to moderate to severeclaudication also improve walking performance and QOL,similar to improvements seen with traditional treadmill
walking programs.
19,20Unstructured exercise programs,
such as education from the vascular specialist for patientswith chronic symptomatic PAD to “go out and walk, ”have
not been shown to be effective and only have a limited
role in care when structured exercise programs are
unavailable.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁcS u p p o r t i v eT e x t
1. Data supporting the ef ﬁcacy of SET as an initial treat-
ment for claudication are high quality and consistentlyshow functional improvements, although speci ﬁc
functional measures used as outcomes across RCTshave varied.
7,16-28Trials with long-term follow-up us-
ing treadmill walking parameters as the performancem e a s u r eh a v es h o w np e r s i s t e n tb e n e ﬁts of SET among
patients with claudication ranging from 18 months
17,18
up to 7 years.25However, a trial of SET using the 6-
minute walk test (6MWT) as the performance mea-sure did not show durable changes at 6 months aftertraining ceased, highlighting an opportunity for futureRecommendations for Exercise Therapy for PAD
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1A1. In patients with chronic symptomatic PAD, SET is r ecommended to improve walking performance, func-
tional status, and QOL.7,16-28
1A2. In patients with chronic symptomatic PAD, a structured community-based exercise program with behav-
ioral change techniques is effective to improve walking performance, functional status, and QOL.5-15
1A3. In patients who have undergone revascularization f or chronic symptomatic PAD, SET after revasculariza-
tion is effective to improve walking pe rformance, functional status, and QOL.29-39
1 B-R4. In patients with functionally limiting claudication, SET or a structured community-based exercise program
should be offered as an initial treatment option.17,18,25,40
2a A5. In patients with chronic symptomatic PAD, alternative programs of nonwalking structured exercise therapy
(eg, arm ergometry, recumbent stepping) can be bene ﬁcial to improve walking performance, functional
status, and QOL.19,20,41-47
2b B-R6. In patients with chronic symptomatic PAD, the usefu lness of structured walking exercise therapy that
avoids moderate to severe ischemic symptoms is uncertain.5,45,46
2b B-R7. In patients with chronic symptomatic PAD, the usefulness of unstructured exercise to improve walking
performance, functional status, and QOL is uncertain.10,12,28JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2539

research on the durability of SET and the measures
used to assess its ef ﬁcacy (ie, traditional standard of
treadmill walking versus 6MWT).48Data also support a
bene ﬁt of SET for patients with symptomatic PAD and
diabetes.49The risk –bene ﬁtr a t i of o rS E Ti nP A Di s
favorable, with an excellent safety pro ﬁle in patients
screened for contraindications to exercise, such asexercise-limiting CVD, amputation, or wheelchairconﬁnement, and other major comorbidities that
would preclude exercise.
6,10,25,42,43,50,51However,
amputation and wheelchair use should not be an ab-solute contraindication because in speci ﬁc settings,
alternative exercise modalities may be available and
useful in these individuals.
52Despite the health bene-
ﬁts associated with SET, its rating as a COR 1 recom-
mendation statement, and a covered Medicarebene ﬁt,
53referral rates remain very low and are
approximately 2% in the United States.54In patients
with PAD, initiating and maintaining a high level ofadherence to SET is challeng ing. Frequent contact with
patients both when performing exercise in the super-
vised setting and at home, as well as multimodal ex-
ercise, has been somewhat effective in promotingretention in SET programs in the research setting.
55
Although patients with asymptomatic PAD may havefunctional impairment and bene ﬁt from increased
physical activity, the bene ﬁt of SET for patients with
asymptomatic PAD has not been adequately stud-ied.
9,56Some patients with PAD who do not self-report
claudication may experience limiting leg symptoms
during objective assessment, such as an exercisetreadmill ABI test or 6MWT, and may thus qualify forSET.
2. Structured community-bas ed exercise programs have
emerged as an effective alternative to SET for patientswith chronic symptomatic PAD. Studies supportingstructured community-based programs for patients
with claudication or leg symptoms atypical for claudi-
cation are more recent than studies supporting super-vised exercise programs a nd have provided strong
evidence in support of the community-basedapproach.
6,8-11,57,58The GOALS (Group Oriented Arte-
rial Leg Study)8included patients with con ﬁrmed PAD
with and without claudicati on (atypical lower extrem-
ity symptoms or no symptoms) and showed increases
in several parameters of functional status for both of
these patient cohort subgroups versus nonexercisingcontrol groups after 6 months,
8with improvement
maintained at 12 months.9As with SET, despite proven
bene ﬁt, initiating and maintaining a high level of
adherence to structured community-based exerciseprograms also remains challenging. Studies that haveincorporated behavioral change techniques, such as
health coaching and activity tracking used insupervised settings, appear to reduce attrition and
promote higher levels of adherence, thereby improvingfunctional and QOL outcomes, both short- and long-term.
6,8,9,12The LITE (Low Intensity Exercise Inter-
v e n t i o ni nP A D )t r i a l5used virtual coaching and activ-
ity tracking in a population of patients with chronic
symptomatic PAD and found th at high-intensity com-
munity-based walking showed greater improvement inthe 6MWT than low-intensity exercise or controlgroups. The MOSAIC (Motivating Structured WalkingActivity in People With Interm ittent Claudication) trial
c o m p a r e da3 - m o n t hs t r u c t u r e dh o m e - b a s e dw a l k i n gprogram that involved minimal counseling (2 in-person
sessions in week 1 and 2 20-minute telephone in-
terventions at weeks 6 and 12) versus usual care withno exercise counseling.
15The exercise group showed
signi ﬁcantly greater improvement in 6MWT distance
than the usual care group.15This evidence supports
structured community-based exercise programs,including home-based programs, to improve functionalstatus for patients with chronic symptomatic PAD.
3. A 3-month RCT that compared percutaneous trans-
luminal angioplasty (PTA), SET, and combined treat-ment for patients with claudication caused byf e m o r o p o p l i t e a ld i s e a s ef o u n dt h a tb o t hS E Ta n dP T Aimproved clinical and QOL outcomes, whereas PTA incombination with SET produced greater bene ﬁts than
either therapy alone.
39The ERASE (Endovascular
Revascularization and Supervised Exercise) study
randomized participants with claudication to endo-
vascular revascularizat ion plus SET or SET alone.32
After 1 year, patients in both groups had signi ﬁcant
improvements in walking distances and health-relatedQOL, with greater improvements in the combined-therapy group.
32This ﬁnding of greater improvement
in the combined-therapy group compared with SET orPTA alone has been reported in several other high-
quality randomized trials and systematic reviews and
meta-analyses.
29-36 ,38Collectively, these studies sup-
port the continued provision of SET to patients withclaudication, whether as a monotherapy or combinedwith revascularization. However, the combination ofrevascularization and SET provides the greatest im-provements in functional status. The combination ofrevascularization with structured community-based
exercise programs, including home-based programs,
for patients with chronic symptomatic PAD is an area inneed of further study.
4. The CLEVER (Claudication: Exercise Versus Endolu-
minal Revascularization) t rial randomized patients
with symptomatic aortoiliac PAD and showed compa-rable bene ﬁts for SET and endovascular revasculari-
zation at 6 and 18 months, with each therapy being
superior to optimal medical care.
17,18AC o c h r a n eGornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042540

review of 10 RCTs with 1,087 participants assessed the
outcomes of endovascular revascularization and SETon functional outcome and reported that the formerdid not provide signi ﬁcant bene ﬁtc o m p a r e dw i t hS E T
alone for functional improvement or QOL.
40An RCT
that compared the 7-year effectiveness of SET or
endovascular revascularization in patients with stableclaudication with iliac or femoropopliteal diseasefound no differences in improved walking and QOLoutcomes.
25Although more secondary interventions
occurred in the exercise group, the total number ofinterventions was greater i n the endovascular revas-
cularization group. Collectively, these studies provide
strong support for initially offering SET to patients
with limiting claudication and no evidence of CLTI,both for reducing claudication symptoms and forimproving functional status and QOL. When SET isunavailable, a structured community-based exerciseprogram should be offered (see Recommendation 2).
5. Exercise therapy protocols for PAD have traditionally
recommended bouts of intermittent walking to mod-
erate or higher pain levels interspersed with short pe-
riods of rest. Some patients may be reluctant to engagein exercise that causes moderate to severe ischemicsymptoms. More recently, an increasing number ofstudies have shown that programs that incorporatealternative regimens of exe rcise can achieve health
bene ﬁts comparable to walking at moderate or higher
levels of claudication pain.
19,41,42,44,59These alterna-
tive regimens avoid claudication and include non-
walking modalities of exercise, such as arm or legcycling and recumbent stepping.
19,41,42,44,59,60Two
2015 meta-analyses provide evidence that alternativeforms of exercise improve walking performance andQOL in patients with PAD.
19,20Resistance training,
particularly if done at high intensity, has also beenshown to improve outcomes in patients with PAD in
s o m e ,b u tn o ta l l ,s t u d i e s .
41,61
6. Studies examining the effects of low-intensity tread-
mill walking to onset of pain have demonstrated im-provements in treadmill performance similar to that ofexercise programs that induce moderate to severe
symptoms.
45,46,62However, 1 clinical trial has recently
shown that a year-long program of low-intensitycommunity-based walking exercise did not improve6MWT distances compare dw i t hac o n t r o lg r o u p .
5It
should be noted that the studies that performed
treadmill-based exercise therapy evaluated outcomeswith a graded treadmill test while the community-based walking trial evaluated change in walking per-formance with both a graded treadmill test and a6MWT, and neither of them showed improvement inthe low-intensity group compared with the controlgroup.
5,46,62
7. Although a very strong evidence base supports SET and
structured community-based exercise programs forpatients with chronic symptomatic PAD, no compel-ling evidence shows that unstructured exercise, suchas patient self-directed ef forts or advice from a health
care professional to “go out and walk, ”can improve
walking performance or QOL. Walking advice andgeneral educational sessions have been used as the
control arms of RCTs that have studied SET and
various structured community-based exercise pro-grams but have not shown any consistent bene ﬁto n
outcomes.
10-12 ,28Thus, the usefulness of unstructured
exercise for patients with chronic symptomatic PAD toimprove walking performance, functional status, andQOL is uncertain, and providing access to structuredexercise is a core component of care for these
patients.
7. REVASCULARIZATION FOR ASYMPTOMATIC PAD
The management of the patient with PAD without re-
ported symptoms (asymptomatic PAD) focuses on GDMT(see Section 5 ,“Medical Therapy and Preventive Foot
Care for the Patient With PAD ”)(Figure 4 ). Occasionally,
surgical or endovascular reva scularization procedures are
performed in asymptomatic patients to support otherinvasive clinically ne cessary procedures.
Recommendations for Revascularization for Asymptomatic PAD
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
2a B-NR1. In patients with asymptomatic PAD, it is reasonable to p erform revascularization procedures (endovascular
or surgical) to reconstruct diseased arteries if needed for the safety, feasibility, or effectiveness of other
procedures (eg, transfemoral aortic valve replaceme nt, mechanical circulatory support, endovascular
aortic aneurysm repair).1-8
3: Harm B-NR2. In patients with asymptomatic PAD, revascularizat ion procedures (endovascular or surgical) should not be
performed solely to prevent progression of disease.9-16JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2541

Synopsis
Patients with PAD may be asymptomatic despite
having a signi ﬁcant burden of arterial lesions (stenoses,
o c c l u s i o n s ,o rb o t h ) .H e r e ,w ef o c u so np a t i e n t sw i t hknown arterial lesions who have no leg symptoms
(asymptomatic PAD, see Section 2 ,“Clinical Assessment
for PAD ”). Although patients with asymptomatic PAD
may have functional impairment compared with thosewithout PAD, revascularization procedures are rarelyindicated, particularly given the increased risk of MALEafter revascularization, including the need for futureprocedures.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. In patients with PAD, endovascular or surgical
revascularization procedures can be performed toreconstruct diseased arteries if needed to facilitateother clinically necessar y procedures, including
catheter-based cardiac or vascular procedures (eg,
transfemoral aortic valve replacement, mechanical
circulatory support, endov ascular abdominal aortic
aneurysm repair). This has been accomplishedthrough conduit placement (eg, iliac artery conduitthat is turned into an iliofemoral bypass at the endof the procedure), endovascular stenting to create anendoconduit,
1or other ancillary techniques that
facilitate the safety of sheath insertion and
removal.2,3The Society for Cardiovascular Angiog-
raphy and Interventions has published recommen-dations regarding speci ﬁc clinical scenarios.
4,5There
are also alternative access approaches for these pro-cedures that can be used in patients with challenginganatomy due to obstructive PAD lesions,
6,7but
alternative access can be associated with anincreased risk of vascular complications.
8
2. Some patients with asymptomatic PAD can progress to
symptomatic disease during longitudinal follow-up,emphasizing the need for longitudinal care of thesepatients (see Section 12 ,“Longitudinal Follow-Up of
PAD ”).
17However, no data suggest that invasive
treatment while PAD is asymptomatic will alter itsnatural history. Data have shown that patients whohave undergone a revascularization procedure are at
increased risk of subsequent complications, particu-
larly MALE, including the need for additional subse-quent revascularization procedures.
9-16Consequently,
the risk-bene ﬁta s s e s s m e n to fr e v a s c u l a r i z a t i o ni na
patient with asymptomatic PAD argues against revas-cularization in this setting. Therefore, no evidencesupports a recommendation for early revascularizationfor asymptomatic individuals.8. REVASCULARIZATION TECHNIQUES AND
REGISTRIES FOR CHRONIC SYMPTOMATIC PADAND CLTI
Revascularization procedures have been studied exten-
sively for patients with PAD and are generally offered totreat symptoms of claudication or the more severe PADpresentations of CLTI and ALI. In the sections that follow,we provide recommendations for the range of these
revascularization procedu res for chronic symptomatic
PAD (claudication) and CLTI, along with therapies that areused adjunctively with revascularization in the setting ofCLTI. Although recommendations addressing endovas-cular and surgical revascular ization are provided, this
document does not address speci ﬁct e c h n i c a la s p e c t so f
revascularization, including choice of devices for endo-vascular treatment of speci ﬁc lesions. Meta-analyses and
appropriate use documents addressing speci ﬁct e c h n i c a l
scenarios have been published.
1-3
Data registries, including the VQI (Vascular Quality
Initiative), NCDR (National Cardiovascular Data Registry),PVI (Peripheral Vascular Intervention) Registry (nowincorporated into the VQI), and the Society of Interven-tional Radiology VIRTEX Registry, have been developedby professional societies to allow for tracking of revas-
cularization procedures an d patient outcomes with op-
portunities for local quality improvement initiatives andbenchmarking compared with other centers.
4,5
9. REVASCULARIZATION FOR CLAUDICATION
(CHRONIC SYMPTOMATIC PAD)
Patients with chronic symptomatic PAD have leg symp-
toms and functional limitation but do not have rest pain
or tissue loss indicating CLTI (see Section 2 ,“Clinical
Assessment for PAD ”). An important manifestation of
chronic symptomatic PAD is claudication, reproducibleexertional leg symptoms that resolve with rest. Treatmentfor claudication includes medical therapy and foot care(see Section 5 ,“M e d i c a lT h e r a p ya n dP r e v e n t i v eF o o t
Care for the Patient With PAD ”), structured exercise (see
Section 6 ,“Exercise Therapy for PAD ”), and revasculari-
zation (endovascular, surgica l, and hybrid procedures).
Revascularization therapy is typically reserved for thosepatients with claudicati on who have not responded
adequately to the former therapies ( Figure 5 ). Most
studies of revascularization for patients with chronicsymptomatic PAD enrolled patients with claudication,which is therefore the focus of this section. The potentialeffects of revascularization on patients with chronic
symptomatic PAD with leg symptoms other than claudi-
cation is an area in need of further study.Gornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042542

FIGURE 5 Algorithm for Revascularization for Cl audication (Chronic Symptomatic PAD)
Colors correspond to Table 3 . GDMT indicates guideline-directed management and therapy; PAD, peripheral artery disease; and QOL, quality of life.JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2543

9.1. Revascularization for Claudication
Synopsis
Ongoing reevaluation of patients with claudication is
important to assess response to treatment (see Section 12 ,
“Longitudinal Follow-Up of PAD ”)(Figure 5 ). Patients
with claudication who have had an adequate response toGDMT (see Section 5 ,“M e d i c a lT h e r a p ya n dP r e v e n t i v e
Foot Care for the Patient With PAD ”), including structuredexercise (see Section 6 ,“Exercise Therapy for PAD ”), and
w h on ol o n g e rh a v es i g n i ﬁcant impairment of functional
status, walking performance, and QOL should continuewith prescribed therapies and should not undergo revas-cularization. For those patients with claudication who donot improve with GDMT, revascularization procedures arethe next therapeutic option. When revascularization isRecommendations for Revascularization for Claudication
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
Revascularization for Claudication: Initial Decision-Making
1 B-NR1. In patients with functionally limiting claudicati on who are being considered for revascularization, po-
tential bene ﬁts with respect to QOL, walking performance , and overall functional status should be
weighed against the risks and durability of interve ntion and possible need for repeated procedures.1-6
2a B-R2. In patients with functionally limiting claudicat ion and an inadequate response to GDMT (including
structured exercise), revascularization is a reasona ble treatment option to improve walking function and
QOL.7-14
3: No Bene ﬁt C-EO3. In patients with claudication who have had an adequa te clinical response to GDMT (including structured
exercise), revascularization is not recommended.
Revascularization for Claudication: Aortoiliac Disease and Femoropopliteal Disease (Excluding Common Femoral Artery Disease)
1A4. In patients with functionally limiting claudication and hemodynamically signi ﬁcant aortoiliac or femo-
ropopliteal disease with inadequate response to GD MT (including structured exercise), endovascular
revascularization is effective to improve walking performance and QOL.7-28
2a B-NR5. In patients with functionally limiting c laudication and hemodynamically signi ﬁcant aortoiliac or femo-
ropopliteal disease with inadequate response to GDMT (including structured exercise), surgical revas-cularization is reasonable if perio perative risk is acceptable and tec hnical factors suggest advantages
over endovascular approaches.
29-31
Revascularization for Claudication: Common Femoral Artery Disease
2a B-R6. In patients with functionally limiting c laudication and hemodynamically signi ﬁcant common femoral
artery disease with inadequate res p o n s et oG D M T( i n c l u d i n gs t r u c t u r e d exercise), surgical endarterec-
tomy is reasonable, especially if endovascular approaches adversely affect profunda femoris arterypathways.
32,33
2b B-R7. In patients with functionally limiting c laudication and hemodynamically signi ﬁcant common femoral
artery disease with inadequate res ponse to GDMT (including structu red exercise), endovascular ap-
proaches may be considered in those at high risk for su rgical revascularization and/or if anatomical
factors are favorable (ie, no adverse effect on profunda femoris artery pathways).33-40
Revascularization for Claudication: Infrapopliteal Disease
2b C-LD8. In patients with functionally limiting claudication and isolated hemodynamically signi ﬁcant infrapopliteal
disease with inadequate response to GDMT (includin g structured exercise), t he effectiveness of endo-
vascular revascularization is unknown.41
2b C-LD9. In patients with functionally limiting claudication and isolated hemodynamically signi ﬁcant infrapopliteal
disease with inadequate response to GDMT (including structured exercise), the effectiveness of surgicalrevascularization is unknown.
42Gornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042544

c o n t e m p l a t e d ,h i s t o r ya n dp h y s i c a le x a m i n a t i o n ,p h y s i -
ological testing, and imaging studies (see Section 3 ,
“Diagnostic Testing for PAD ”) that include anatomic
evaluation of disease help inform treatment decisions andplanning of revascularizatio n. Revascularization is per-
formed on lesions that are deemed to be hemodynami-
cally signi ﬁcant, and resting or provoked intravascular
pressure measurements may be useful when lesion sig-niﬁcance is in question.
43,44Revascularization decisions
are based on many factors: clinical presentation,including severity of the patient ’ss y m p t o m sa n da n t i c i -
pated natural history; degree of functional limitation andQOL impairment; response to medical therapy, including
structured exercise; and the likelihood of a bene ﬁcial
short- and longer-term outcome, balanced against po-tential short-term (eg, bleeding, infection, MACE) andlonger-term procedural risk.
1-3,5,6,23,45Patient-centered
discussions are critical in making appropriate decisionsregarding revascularization and for building a trusting
longitudinal relationship. More than 70% of patientsprefer to have an active role in determining their treat-
ment plan for claudication.
46-48Such discussions should
be undertaken when considering whether to undergo arevascularization procedure , its timing, and approach for
revascularization (ie, endovascular or surgical), andshould take into account the patient ’sg o a l s ,t r e a t m e n t
preferences, and perception of risk. Patient engagementis also essential to facilitate smoking cessation, medica-tion adherence, and participation in structured exercise.
Endovascular therapy typically involves the displace-
ment or removal of stenotic or occlusive atheroscleroticdisease using catheter-based techniques. Endovascular
techniques for claudication include PTA (sometimesreferred to as “plain-old balloon angioplasty ”); drug-
coated balloon angioplasty; bare-metal, drug-eluting,and covered stents; lithotripsy; and atherectomy. Endo-vascular tools are selected based upon lesion character-
istics (eg, anatomic location, lesion length, degree of
calciﬁcation), operator experience, and the range of
available technologies. The appropriateness of particularendovascular therapies for the treatment of claudicationis beyond the scope of this document but has beenaddressed in other multisocietal statements.
49-51
Surgical revascularization for claudication most
commonly involves the removal of plaque from diseased
arteries (endarterectomy) or bypass around narrowed or
occluded segments, sometimes performed in combinationwith endovascular treatments ( “hybrid approaches ”).
Assessment of options for bypass conduit is performed aspart of evaluation for surgical revascularization.
Factors such as diabetes, poor functional status, frailty,
ESKD, and obesity have all been shown to increase therisks of complications for patients undergoing surgical
revascularization, and caution is warranted in offeringsurgical treatment to patients with several of these
conditions.
52
Recommendation-Speci ﬁcS u p p o r t i v eT e x t
Revascularization for Claudication: Initial Decision-Making
1. Treatment of claudication can improve health-related
QOL as well as pain-free and total walking distance.
7-14
Both parameters should be evaluated, when possible,before and after revascularization for claudication.However, given the bene ﬁts of the less invasive
measures of GDMT and structured exercise, revascu-larization is a second-tier treatment for most patients
with claudication. Patients and clinicians should
collaboratively consider the evidence-based, antici-pated interventional outcome compared with theexisting patient QOL and functional impairment andthe natural history of the untreated arterial lesions ina shared decision-making process.
46,53Revasculariza-
tion strategies should be closely aligned with bothshort- and longer-term patient-centered goals of care.
Revascularization proce dures increase the risk of
readmission and subsequent MALE, including reste-nosis and repeat intervention, and risk of ALI; thus,balancing risks and bene ﬁts is important.
1-3,5,6,45The
following factors should be considered in the shareddecision-making process: possibility of symptomaticrecurrence; development of more advanced symp-toms, including ALI or CLTI; and the ﬁnite durability
of revascularization proce dures with potential need
for repeat intervention(s). A speci ﬁc tool for shared
decision-making related to claudication has been
developed and published.
54,55
2. Ongoing reevaluation and discussions between pa-
tients with PAD and clinicians are important to assessresponse to treatment. For patients who remain func-tionally limited despite implementation of GDMT and
structured exercise, revascularization is the next ther-
apeutic consideration. Revascularization (open andendovascular) has shown effectiveness in mitigation ofpain with walking and improving walking distance aswell as QOL,
7-13although tradeoffs in durability need to
be considered. These improvements are most durablein the larger, in ﬂow arteries of the aortoiliac segment
but are also seen in the infrainguinal out ﬂow arterial
segments. The addition of SET after revascularization
can further improve functional outcomes and walkingperformance (see Section 6 ,“Exercise Therapy for
PAD ”).
9For patients with functionally limiting claudi-
cation who have multilevel PAD (ie, aortoiliac andinfrainguinal disease), a staged approach to careincorporating revascularization, GDMT (includingstructured exercise), and reassessment of clinical
response during longitudinal follow-up is undertaken.JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2545

3. Patients with claudication who have had an adequate
response to medical therapies, including structuredexercise, and who no longer have signi ﬁcant impair-
ment of functional status and walking performance andQOL, do not require revascu larization. Although
revascularization may improve symptoms of claudica-
tion, it may also be subject to restenosis, recurrence ofsymptoms, and risk of MALE, including need for addi-tional procedures.
1-3,5,45Patients with claudication
should be observed longitudinally for change insymptoms, including worse ning functional status or
development of signs or symptoms of CLTI, and toensure maintenance of GDMT (see Section 12 ,“Longi-
tudinal Follow-Up of PAD ”).
Revascularization for Claudication: Aortoiliac and
Femoropopliteal Disease (Excluding Common FemoralArtery Disease)
4. Multiple RCTs have compared endovascular proced-
ures with various combinations of medical treatmentwith or without supervised or unsupervised exerciseprograms for patients with aortoiliac and/or femo-
ropopliteal disease and claudication.
7-28Although
t h e s et r i a l sh a v eu s e dd i f f e rent endpoints and enrolled
patients with anatomic disease distribution at differentlevels, overall, these studies have shown theeffectiveness of revascula rization to improve walking
performance and QOL in patients with claudica-tion.
8,10,23,30Combining revascularization with either
supervised exercise or pharmacotherapy results in
greater improvements in thes e endpoints than exercise
or medical therapy alone.9,10,23,24,56In a network meta-
analysis of 37 trials (15 of which included endovasculartherapy) that randomized 2,983 patients over a meanweighted follow-up of 12 months to best medicaltherapy, SET, endovascular therapy (12 trials), orendovascular therapy plus SET (8 trials), the combi-nation of endovascular therapy plus SET outperformed
other treatment modalities with respect to walking
performance and QOL.
57Symptom improvement after
endovascular treatment for claudication is related to
vessel patency, and long-term patency is greater in theaortoiliac than in the femoropopliteal segment.
58
Furthermore, factors associated with lower vesselpatency include longer lesion length, occlusion ratherthan stenosis, the presence of multiple and diffuse le-
sions, poor-quality runoff, diabetes, CKD, renal failure,
and smoking.
59-62
T h eC L E V E R( C l a u d i c a t i o n :E x e r c i s eV e r s u sE n d o l u -minal Revascularization) tri al, which enrolled patients
with aortoiliac disease and compared endovasculartherapy with SET and with medications alone, showedthat endovascular therapy and supervised exercise hadimproved walking time compared with medication
alone at 6 months.
11,12Other RCTs that included pa-
tients with aortoiliac disease have shown improvementin QOL, as assessed by questionnaires and time to onsetof claudication, may be superior with endovascular
treatment in combination with a medical and exercise
treatment plan, compared with medical treatment
alone.
7,8,15The ERASE (Endovascular Revascularization
And Supervised Exercise) trial randomized patientswith claudication and aortoiliac and femoropoplitealdisease to endovascular revascularization plus super-vised exercise or supervised exercise alone.
9After 1
year, patients in both groups had signi ﬁcant improve-
ments in walking distance s and health-related QOL,
with greater improvements in the combined-therapygroup.
9The long-term comparative effectiveness of 1)
endovascular revascularization versus SET and 2)medical therapy versus SET and medical therapywithout revascularization for aortoiliac disease isunknown.
Multiple RCTs have shown short-term ef ﬁcacy of
endovascular treatment of femoropopliteal disease forclaudication versus SET or medical therapy, withbene ﬁt that diminishes by 1 year after the proced-
ure.
7,13-20 ,22,27Two separate systematic reviews
including RCTs that enrolled patients with femo-ropopliteal disease report ed that endovascular treat-
ment of claudication improved walking performance
and QOL.
8,10,29
When considering revascula rization for a patient with
functionally limiting claudication with aortoiliac dis-ease, femoropopliteal disease, or both despite GDMTand structured exercise, da ta regarding risk of reste-
nosis, durability, and repeat interventions, as well as
outcomes, may inform discussions about endovascularrevascularization.
5. Systematic reviews have concluded that surgical
revascularization procedures are an effective treat-
ment for claudication involving both the aortoiliac
and femoropopliteal segments and have a positiveimpact on QOL and walking parameters, but evi-dence data are sparse comparing surgery with othertreatments.
8,29-31 ,63Selection of a revascularization
approach is therefore individualized on the basis of thepatient ’sg o a l s ,a n a t o m i c ﬁndings, perioperative risk,
and anticipated bene ﬁt. Surgical procedures for clau-
dication are usually reserved for the following in-
dividuals: those who did not derive adequate bene ﬁt
from nonsurgical therapy; those who have arterialanatomy favorable to obtaining a durable result withsurgery; and those who hav e acceptable risk of peri-
operative adverse events. Acceptable risk is de ﬁned by
the individual patient and provider based on symptomGornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042546

severity, comorbid conditions, and appropriate risk
evaluation. Assessment of r isk of perioperative MACE
after surgical revascularization is an importantconsideration in determining revascularization strat-
egy. Clinical practice guidelines for the evaluation and
management of patients undergoing noncardiac sur-
gery, including vascular surgical procedures, havebeen previously published.
64
Revascularization for Claudication: Common Femoral
Artery Disease
6. Although no randomized trials have compared common
femoral endarterectomy to medical therapy alone,
endarterectomy has been performed in this anatomic
location for many years with durable results.32,33In a
report of 713 patients observed for 7 years after commonfemoral endarterectomy, excellent patency rates wereobserved.
32However, common femoral endarterectomy
is associated with potential for short-termmorbidity.
32,65In an analysis of data from the National
Surgical Quality Improvemen tP r o j e c td a t a b a s eo f1 , 5 1 3
patients who underwent common femoral endarterec-
tomy, a minor or major complication occurred in 7.9% ofpatients.
65In their series of >700 patients, Wieker
et al32reported perioperative complications including
wound infection (3.4%), lymphatic ﬁstula (3.4%), and
need for procedure-related local revision (8.6%). How-ever, in this same series, primary patency was 78.5% at 7years, suggesting that common femoral endarterec-
tomy is a highly durable procedure.
32
7. Meta-analytic data, including 2 RCTs of 197 patients,
have demonstrated similar risk of 30-day mortality andearly reintervention, less procedural morbidity, similar1-year primary patency, and similar need for latereintervention when co mparing common femoral
endovascular interventions with surgical endarterec-tomy.
33-35 ,38,66Nevertheless, in observational studies,
outcomes for endovascular interventions for common
femoral artery disease vary according to the underlying
anatomy (eg, bifurcation lesion versus not, involve-ment of branch arteries versus common femoral arteryonly) and the device(s) used for revasculariza-tion.
33,37,39,40Further, patients selected for endovas-
cular common femoral artery revascularization areoften those in whom wound healing would be subop-
timal after a surgical approach, such as those treatedwith radiation therapy or pr evious surgery to the local
area, or with severe obesity.
40Further evaluation of
patient and treatment factors are necessary to betterdeﬁne the role of endovascular approaches to common
femoral artery disease and its safety and effectiveness
relative to endarterectomy. In cases where endovas-
cular approaches to the common femoral arteryadversely affect needed profunda femoris arterypathways (ie, collaterals), open surgical revasculariza-tion (ie, endarterectomy that preserves profunda fem-oris artery branches) is preferred.
Revascularization for Claudication: Infrapopliteal
Disease
8. Most studies of endovascular revascularization for
infrapopliteal disease have been conducted in thepopulation of patients with CLTI. Isolated infrapopli-teal disease is an uncommon cause of claudication. Thelong-term patency of infrapopliteal endovascular pro-cedures is lower than for aortoiliac or femoropopliteallesions, making infrapopliteal endovascular proced-
ures more appropriate for the treatment of CLTI where
short-term patency may be suf ﬁcient for wound heal-
ing.
41There are no RCTs of endovascular revasculari-
zation versus medical therapy and structured exercisefor treatment of isolated infrapopliteal disease in pa-tients with claudication, a nd thus the effectiveness of
these procedures in this setting is unknown.
9. Isolated infrapopliteal disease is an uncommon cause
of claudication, and treatment of isolated infrapopli-
teal disease is typically reserved for patients with CLTI.No RCTs have evaluated surgical revascularizationversus medical therapy and exercise for patients withisolated infrapopliteal disease. In a registry-basedstudy from VQI of patients with claudication whow e r et r e a t e dw i t hs u r g i c a lr e v ascularization, infrain-
guinal bypass to the infrapopliteal vessels was associ-
ated with higher rates of perioperative complications
a n dM A L Ea t1 - y e a rf o l l o w - u pc o m p a r e dw i t hb y p a s st othe popliteal arteries.
42Accordingly, the effectiveness
of surgical revascularization for isolated infrapoplitealdisease in patients with claudication is unknown.
9.2. Conduit for Surgical Revascularization for Femoropopliteal
Disease
Recommendation for Conduit for Surgical Revascularization for Femoropopliteal Disease
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
1A1. In patients who are undergoing surgical revascularization for functionally limiting claudication and he-
modynamically signi ﬁcant femoropopliteal disease, bypass to the popliteal artery with autogenous vein is
recommended in preference to prosthetic graft material.1-5JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2547

Recommendation for Team-Based Care for CLTI
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
1 B-NR1. In patients with CLTI, a multispecialty care team should evaluate and provide comprehensive care with
goals of complete wound healing, minimizing tiss ue loss, and preservation of ambulatory status.1,2Synopsis
The super ﬁcial femoral and proximal popliteal arteries
are common anatomic sites of stenosis or occlusion amongpatients with PAD across the clinical subsets. Femoral-popliteal bypass is therefore one of the most commonsurgical revascularization procedures when surgicalrevascularization is undertaken for functionally limitingclaudication and is performed under general or regionalanesthesia (see Section 9.1 ,“Revascularization for Clau-
dication ”). The type and size of conduit and site of
popliteal artery anastomosis (above versus below knee)are major determinants of outcomes associated withfemoral-popliteal bypass.
1-4Note, this recommendation
pertains to conduit for surgical revascularization for fem-oropopliteal disease only; prosthetic conduits performwell for aortoiliac reconstruction.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Multiple RCTs, systematic reviews, and meta-analyses
have identi ﬁed a clear and consistent primary patency
bene ﬁt for autogenous vein versus prosthetic conduit
for femoral-popliteal artery bypass.
1-3,5Thus,autogenous vein, generally the great saphenous vein,
should be the ﬁrst choice of conduit when bypass is
performed for functionally limiting claudication withinadequate response to GDMT with hemodynamicallysigni ﬁcant femoropopliteal disease.
10. MANAGEMENT OF CLTI
Patients with CLTI have an advanced form of PAD that
m a n i f e s t sa sr e s tp a i no rm i n o ro rm a j o rt i s s u el o s s( s e eSection 2.1 ,“Recognizing Clinical Subsets of PAD ”). Team-
based, multispecialty care is optimal for the care of pa-
tients with CLTI. Revascula rization is considered the
standard treatment for patients with CLTI, rather than theexception, to minimize tissue loss and preserve a func-tional limb and ambulatory status. Therapies for woundcare, management of infection, and pressure of ﬂoading
are important adjunctive components of care for CLTI inaddition to revascularization ( Figures 6 and 7 ).
10.1. Team-Based Care for CLTI
Synopsis
W o u n dh e a l i n ga n dp r e v e n t i o no fa m p u t a t i o na r et h e
primary goals of care for patients with CLTI. Thecomplexity of care required for patients with CLTI ne-
cessitates expertise in vascular care and revascularization
techniques, wound-healing th erapies, podiatry, and foot
surgery, as well as other areas of expertise ( Table 15 ).
Providing multidisciplinary approaches to care in a coor-dinated, patient-centered manner has led to the devel-opment of multispecialty care teams for PAD andspeci ﬁcally for CLTI, in many different forms and
structures.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. The components of multispecialty care teams for CLTI
include expertise in revascularization, pressure off-loading, treatment of infection, and wound care,among other areas of expertise ( Table 15 ). The man-
agement of patients with CLTI and nonhealing wounds
should include coordinated efforts for both revascu-
larization and wound healing because the risk of limb-threatening infections remains until complete woundhealing is achieved. The structure and activities of suchmultidisciplinary care teams may vary according toFIGURE 6 Components of Care for CLTI
CLTI indicates chronic limb-threatening ischemia.Gornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042548

several factors, including the local availability of re-
sources. Previous groups have described various com-
binations of activities of this team, which are inaddition to revascularization, and include functionssuch as wound care, infection management, rehabili-tation, orthotics, and prosthetics.
1-3Am u l t i s o c i e t a l
document on competencies for endovascular special-ists on the multispecialt y care team has been pub-
lished.
4Multispecialty care teams should also include
expertise in the medical management of diabetes,which is particularly important in the context of CLTI.
Coordination of care and communication among team
m e m b e r si si m p o r t a n t ,v e r s u sa dh o co ru n s t r u c t u r e dreferrals among various specialty clinicians notinvolved in interdisciplinary care. Patients with CLTImust be evaluated by a multispecialty care team beforemajor amputation, except in instances of life-threatening sepsis. The objective of this strategy is toevaluate all revascularizati on and therapeutic options
with the goal of preserving a functional limb.FIGURE 7 Algorithm for Management of CLTI
Colors correspond to Table 3 . CLTI indicates chronic limb-threatening ischemia, GDMT, guideline-directed management and therapy; PAD, peripheral artery disease; and
QOL, quality of life.JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2549

10.2. Revascularization for CLTITABLE 15 Multispecialty Care Team for PAD
A team of professionals representing different specialties and disciplines to assist in the evaluation and management of the patient with PAD. For th e care of patients
who also have CLTI, the team should include individuals who are skilled in endovascular revascularization, surgical revascularization, wound-hea ling therapies and
foot surgery, and medical evaluation and care.
Interdisciplinary care team members may include:
nVascular medical and surgical specialists (ie, vascular medicine, vascul ar surgery, vascular interventional radiology, interventional cardiol ogy)
nAdvance practice provider –nurse practitioners/physician assistants
nNurses
nPodiatrists, orthopedic surgeons, or both
nWound care specialists
nEndocrinologists
nInternal medicine specialists
nInfectious disease specialists
nDiagnostic radiologists and other vascular imaging specialists
nPharmacists
nPhysical medicine and rehabilitation clinicians
nSocial workers
nClinical exercise physiologists
nPhysical and occupational therapists
nNutritionists and dieticians
Patients and family members (collaborate with multispecialty care team)
Modiﬁed with permission from Gerhard-Herman et al.5Copyright 2017 American Heart Association, Inc., and American College of Cardiology Foundation.
CLTI indicates chronic limb-threatening ischemia; and PAD, peripheral artery disease.
Recommendations for Revascularization for CLTI
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
Revascularization Goals for CLTI
1 B-R1. In patients with CLTI, surgical, endovascular, or hyb rid revascularization tec hniques are recommended,
when feasible, to minimize tissue loss, heal wounds, relieve pain, and preserve a functional limb.1-14
1 C-EO2. In patients with CLTI, an evaluation for revascularization options by a multispecialty care team is rec-
ommended before amputation ( Table 15 ).
Revascularization Strategy for CLTI
1A3. In patients undergoing surgical revascularization f or CLTI, bypass to the popliteal or infrapopliteal ar-
teries (ie, tibial, pedal) should be constructed with autogenous vein if available.14-20
1 B-R4. In patients with CLTI due to infrainguinal disease, an atomy, available conduit, patient comorbidities, and
patient preferences should be cons idered in selecting the optimal ﬁrst revascularization strategy (sur-
gical bypass or endovascu lar revascularization) ( Table 16 ).3,13
1 B-R5. In patients with CLTI who are candidates for surgical bypass and endovascular revascularization, ultra-
sound mapping of the great saphenous vein is recommended.3,13Gornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042550

Synopsis
The central component of the care of patients with
CLTI is revascularization to improve blood ﬂow to the
limb, with the goals of preventing amputation and mini-mizing tissue loss to preserve a functional limb, healwounds, and relieve PAD-associated pain ( Figures 6
and 7 ). Revascularization for CLTI may include endovas-
cular and surgical procedures as well as hybrid procedures
that combine both approaches, either concomitantly or inas t a g e df a s h i o n .S u r g i c a la p p r o a c h e s ,i n c l u d i n gb y p a s sand endarterectomy, can be used for revascularization ofCLTI. Technical aspects of s urgery for CLTI, including
availability of high-quality autogenous (eg, saphenous)vein conduit, are important determinants of success andshould be carefully considered by the multispecialty care
team. Numerous endovascular techniques are available to
facilitate procedural success, and lesion characteristicsare used in selecting the speci ﬁc endovascular approach
to revascularization for CLTI. The BEST-CLI (Best Endo-vascular versus Best Surgical Therapy in Patients withCLI) and BASIL-2 (Bypass versus Angioplasty for SevereIschaemia of the Leg) trials have further informed revas-cularization strategy in patients with CLTI.
3,13Factors thatmay in ﬂuence revascularizati on strategy for CLTI are
shown in Table 16 .
Recommendation-Speci ﬁcS u p p o r t i v eT e x t
Revascularization Goals for CLTI
1. Patients with CLTI are at high risk of major amputation
as well as MACE, including death. In a systematic re-
view of 13 studies of patients with CLTI who did not
receive revascularization and that included patientsenrolled in medical and angiogenic therapy trials, a22% all-cause mortality rate and a 22% rate of majoramputation at a median follow-up of 12 months wereobserved.
1Thus, all patients with CLTI should undergo
assessment for revascularization ( Figure 7 ). Revascu-
larization can be accomplished by endovascular, sur-
g i c a l ,a n dh y b r i da p p r o a c h e s ,a n dd a t af r o mR C T sa n d
observational evidence inform revascularization strat-egy in CLTI.
36B o t he n d o v a s c u l a ra n ds u r g i c a lr e v a s -
cularization have been demonstrated to be effectivetreatments for preventing amputation inCLTI.
2,3,13,14,36-40Hybrid revascularization techniques
can also be used for revascularization of PAD, espe-cially for patient anatomy including aortoiliac disease,2a B-NR6. In patients with CLTI for whom a surgical approac h is selected and a suitable autogenous vein is un-
available, alternative conduits such as prosthetic or cadaveric grafts can be effective for bypass to the
popliteal and tibial arteries.21-26
2a B-NR7. In patients with CLTI and nonhealing wounds or gangre ne, revascularization in a manner that achieves in-
line blood ﬂow or maximizes perfusion to the wound bed can be bene ﬁcial.27-33
2a C-LD8. In patients with CLTI with ischemic rest pain (ie, wi thout nonhealing wounds or gangrene) attributable to
multilevel arterial disease, a revasc ularization strategy addressing in ﬂow disease ﬁrst is reasonable.34,35
TABLE 16 Factors That May In ﬂuence Revascularization Strategy for CLTI
Factors That May In ﬂuence Optimal
Revascularization Modality Clinical Examples (Other Factors Being Equal)
Anatomy Strategy for current revascularization considers history of failed previous revascularization procedures (surgical,
endovascular, or both)
Anatomic characteristics that may favor surgical revascularization include:
nlesions involving both the common femoral artery and origin of the profunda femoris artery
nmultilevel chronic total occlusions
nlesions in which endovascular treatment would a dversely impact future surgical bypass options
nlesions that are long segment, involving the belo w-knee popliteal and infrapopliteal arteries
Available conduit Absence of suitable autogenous vein (eg, due to previous harvest for coronary artery bypass surgery) may favor
endovascular revascularization.
Patient comorbidities High estimated perioperative risk (eg, coronary ischemia, cardiomyopathy and heart failure, severe lung disease,
CKD, and frailty) may favor endovascular revascularization.
Patient preferences Patient preference for 1 revascularization modality (surgical or endovascular) over the other, after participating in
shared decision-making.
Modiﬁed with permission from Gerhard-Herman et al.5Copyright 2017 American Heart Association, Inc., and American College of Cardiology Foundation.
CKD indicates chronic kidney disease; and CLTI, chronic limb-threatening ischemia.JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2551

and the use of hybrid revascularization procedures is
supported by observational studies.5,6,9-11,41-45In the
aortoiliac segment, less invasive hybrid procedureshave similar primary pate ncy and limb salvage rates
when compared with open surgical reconstruc-
tion,
4,5,45especially when using covered stent
grafts.4,6,7,45Similarly, hybrid infrainguinal in-
terventions have similar patency and limb salvage ratesto open bypass in selected patients.
8-12
2. In nonemergency circumstances (ie, patients who are
not septic from lower extremity ischemia and infec-tion), evaluation by a multi specialty care team, when
available, before amputation ( Table 15 )i sr e c o m -
mended to potentially identify revascularization op-
t i o n sa n do t h e rw a y st op r e s e r v eaf u n c t i o n a ll i m b .Such an evaluation generally includes imaging forassessment of revascularization options (eg, duplexu l t r a s o u n d ,C T A ,M R A ,o rc a t h e t e r - b a s e da n g i o g r a m ) ,assessment of the presence and degree of infection,bony abnormalities, if any, and the overall functionalstatus of the patient. The objective of this strategy is to
minimize tissue loss and preserve a functional limb
with revascularization. Re vascularization, with its
associated procedural risk, is not warranted in thesetting of a nonviable limb. For patients in this setting,palliative management of the limb, includingcontinued wound care, pain control, and amputationwhen clinically indicated, is more appropriate (seeSection 10.3.4 ,“Amputation for CLTI ”).
Revascularization Strategy for CLTI
3. Many large RCTs and obse rvational studies have
shown that bypass to the popliteal artery should beconstructed with autogenous vein, either reversed orin situ.
14-20Large single-center tr ials and registry data
have shown superior ef ﬁcacy of autogenous vein to
prosthetic conduit in bypass to infrapopliteal ar-
teries.38,39,46Although single-segment great saphe-
nous vein is the preferred conduit, bypass graftsconstructed with small saphenous and arm (ie, basilicor cephalic) veins have been shown in single-centerstudies to have durable patency in the absence ofautogenous great saphenous vein.
47,48In addition,
when single-segment autogenous vein is unavailable,
use of a composite bypass conduit (ie, conduit derived
from multiple different vein segments) as well asbypass to an isolated poplit eal arterial segment that
has collateral out ﬂow to the foot (as a mechanism to
utilize a shorter segment of vein) are both acceptablemethods of revascularization and should beconsidered.
49,50
4. Two recently published and seminal RCTs have
addressed whether the ﬁrst revascularization strategyf o rap a t i e n tw i t hC L T Is h o u l db ee n d o v a s c u l a ri n t e r -
vention or surgical bypass.3,13The BEST-CLI trial
enrolled patients with infrainguinal, with or withoutinfrapopliteal, disease wh o were candidates for both
surgical bypass and endovascular revascularization,
where high-quality great saphenous vein was available
(Cohort 1), or where alternative conduits were neces-sary to complete surgical bypass (Cohort 2).
3This study
found that for patients with available single-segmentsaphenous vein (Cohort 1), the composite outcome ofdeath from any cause or MALE (de ﬁned as a major
amputation above the ankle, new bypass graft, graftthrombectomy, graft revision, or thrombolysis)
occurred in 32% fewer patients randomized to surgical
bypass (302 events/709 patients, 42.6%) than toendovascular revascularization (408 events/711 pa-tients, 57.4%) at a median of 2.7 years of follow-up (HR:0.68 [95% CI: 0.59-0.79]; P<0.001).
3T h ed i f f e r e n c ew a s
driven by higher rates of rep eat revascularization in
the endovascular group. The group without adequategreat saphenous vein (Cohort 2) did not meet pre-
speci ﬁed enrollment targets to achieve statistical po-
wer, and no observed difference was observed in therate of the composite outcome of death or MALE (HR:0.79 [95% CI: 0.58-1.06]; P¼0.12) between endovas-
cular revascularization (95 events/199 patients, 47.7%)and surgical bypass (83 events/194 patients, 42.8%).
3
In the BASIL-2 (Bypass versus Angioplasty for SevereIschaemia of the Leg) trial, which studied patients with
infrapopliteal with or without more proximal infrain-
guinal disease, major amputation or death occurredmore often after bypass treatment (108 events/172 pa-tients, 63%) than endovascular (92 events/173 patients,53%) (adjusted HR: 1.35 [95% CI: 1.02-1.80]; P¼0.037).
13
This difference was driven by fewer deaths in the
endovascular treatment group. The contrasting ﬁnd-
ings of the BEST-CLI and BASIL-2 trials highlight the
need to consider patient clinical and anatomic char-
acteristics when selecting th e initial revascularization
strategy for patients with CLTI, including consider-ation of patient risk estimation, staging of the limb forseverity and anatomic pattern of disease, previousvascular interventions, an d availability of conduit.
Examples of potential factors in selecting revasculari-zation strategy in patients with CLTI are summarized
inTable 16 . The Global Vascular Guidelines reviewed
available data on management of CLTI and recom-mended the use of evaluation tools that considerwound perfusion, infection, and extent of the tissueloss.
51,52The Global Limb Anatomic Staging System
(GLASS) can be incorporated into the decision-makingprocess for revascularization.
53A patient-centered de-
cision-making process around revascularization strat-
egy for CLTI should also incorporate patient goals andGornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042552

preferences, input of the mu ltidisciplinary care team,
and risk-bene ﬁtc a l c u l a t i o n .
5. Multiple studies have demonstrated improved patency
of femoral-popliteal bypasses when constructed withautogenous vein, and the great saphenous vein is the
optimal venous conduit for femoral-popliteal
bypass.
51,54,55In the BEST-CLI trial, the presence or
absence of a 3-mm diameter great saphenous vein wasthe criterion used to determine adequacy of thisconduit for surgical bypass.
3The protocol in BASIL-2
stated that vein conduit had to be deemed “suitable ”
to accomplish surgical bypass, or alternative conduitswould be used, a circumstance that occurred in 7% of
trial patients.
13Preoperative assessment of the ade-
quacy of the great saphenous vein conduit is importantwhen developing a patient-speci ﬁcr e v a s c u l a r i z a t i o n
strategy for CLTI ( Table 16 ). Great saphenous vein
evaluation, also known as “vein mapping, ”is generally
performed in a vascular laboratory using duplex ul-trasound. This test includes assessment of veinpatency, size (vein diameter), length of available vein,
and other anatomic features such as branching and
presence of acute or previous thrombosis. Ultrasoundmapping can also be used, if necessary, to assess otherpotential venous conduits, including the small saphe-nous and upper extremity (eg, cephalic and basilic)veins. If formal vascular laboratory-based duplex ul-trasound is unavailable, saphenous vein assessmentmay be performed at the bedside using point-of-care
ultrasound, although mapping performed in a
vascular laboratory setting by certi ﬁed personnel is
preferred.
6. Although autogenous veins are the preferred conduit
for surgical revascularization, prosthetic conduit is asecondary option for patients with CLTI without suit-able saphenous veins who require surgical revascular-ization. Studies have shown that patients can be
treated successfully with autogenous vein bypass
graft
22,23or prosthetic bypass graft21,24even after pre-
vious endovascular intervention. Studies haveexplored the ef ﬁcacy of use of a prosthetic bypass with
distal autogenous vein cuff in patients with CLTI.These circular vein patches, intended to limit narrow-ing where the prosthetic gra ft meets the target artery,
have shown mixed results.
52,56,57Data supporting the
use of cadaveric vein graft conduit for patients with
CLTI are limited; however, this also remains an optionfor patients for whom a surgical revascularization
strategy is undertaken and autogenous vein conduit isunavailable.
25,26
7. The goal of revascularization for CLTI is to maximize
blood ﬂow to the foot. Historically, operators have
tried to provide in-line blood ﬂow to a named infra-
popliteal artery to the foot.27,28,30,58-60However, in
some instances, no option is available to provide in-line blood ﬂow to a named infrapopliteal artery. A
more recent paradigm for r evascularization for PAD
focuses on maximizing perfusion to the wound bed.For patients with wounds due to CLTI, the goal is toprovide direct pulsatile ﬂow to the wound bed, or
“angiosome. ”This can be accomplished through direct
revascularization or indirect revascularization via col-laterals but is less certain after indirect revasculariza-tion without visible collaterals.
61,62Data from meta-
analyses of patients undergoing endovascular therapyfor CLTI suggest that amputation rates are lowest fordirect revascularization, intermediate for indirect
revascularization via collaterals, and highest for indi-
rect revascularization; similarly, wound healing asso-
ciated with direct revascularization and indirectrevascularization via collaterals appears similar but isless favorable after indi rect revascularization.
29-31
In meta-analyses of patients who underwent either
surgical bypass or endovascular therapy, superiorwound-healing rate, shorter time to wound healing,and superior limb salvage have been observed with
direct revascularization compared with indirect
revascularization, but these associations are onlyapparent for patients undergoing endovascularrevascularization.
29-33
8. For patients with multilevel disease and ischemic rest
pain (ie, no wounds or tissue loss), in ﬂow lesions are
generally addressed ﬁrst.34,35Depending on procedural
characteristics, including contrast volume used, radi-
ation exposure, and procedure time, out ﬂow lesions
can be addressed in the same procedure setting or at alater time if symptoms persist. This strategy forischemic rest pain is distinct from the strategy for thepatient with CLTI and tissue loss (ie, nonhealingwound or gangrene). In cases of CLTI with tissue loss,patients generally require revascularization to thegreatest extent possible, often treating both in ﬂow and
outﬂow lesions at the same setting, to optimize wound
healing.JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2553

10.3. Minimizing Tissue Loss for CLTI
10.3.1. Pressure Of ﬂoading for CLTI
Synopsis
Pressure of ﬂoading is a component of management of
the patient with CLTI ( Figure 7 ). Excessive or persistent
pressure combined with a loss of protective sensation of
the plantar aspect of the foot leads to tissue loss and
d i a b e t i cf o o tu l c e r s .S h e a r ,c o m p r e s s i v e ,f r i c t i o n a l ,a n dtensile forces are the main causes of diabetic foot ulcersand may be a manifestation of CLTI in patients withconcomitant diabetes and PAD. Because of the complexityof the human foot during weight bearing, consideration ofanatomy, mechanics, and sensation is required to eval-uate function and determine appropriate pressure off-
loading therapy, especially in patients with CLTI.
Podiatrists or other foot-trained professionals (eg,
orthopedic surgeons, orthotists and prosthetists,specialist nurses) are best suited to evaluate these pa-tients for pressure of ﬂoading and are important mem-
bers of the multispecialty care team. When a podiatricservice is unavailable locally, pressure of ﬂoading and
wound care strategies can be coordinated by the avail-
able multispecialty care team. Most published literature
supports the use of pressure of ﬂoading strategies in the
context of diabetic foot ulcers, but these may also beapplied to patients with CLTI and foot wounds withoutdiabetes.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Multiple randomized and nonrandomized studies have
shown the superiority of nonremovable over remov-
able pressure of ﬂoading devices for wound healing in
the setting of diabetic foot ulcers.
2,6-9Forefoot pres-
sure of ﬂoading shoes or cast shoes have also been
shown in several nonrandomized studies to be effec-tive in promoting wound healing.
1-5As i g n i ﬁcantpercentage of patients with diabetic foot ulcers have
PAD; therefore, these data are applicable to the popu-lation with CLTI.
13
2. At least 2 well-conducted RCTs have shown that
e f f e c t i v ep r e s s u r eo f ﬂoading footwear reduces the risk
of recurrent plantar ulcers in patients with diabetes.10
In a randomized trial, subje cts were treated with foot
shape- and barefoot pressure-based orthoses versusstandard of care for 15 months.
10Compared with
standard of care, these customized orthoses were moreeffective in reducing submetatarsal head plantar ulcerrecurrence but only if worn as prescribed.
10,11In
another RCT,11171 patients with diabetic neuropathy
and previous foot ulcer were randomized to custom-made footwear with improved and sustained pressureofﬂoading or to usual care. In individuals with high
adherence, custom-made footwear was associated withlower plantar foot ulcer recurrence at 18 months. In anRCT comparing 3 different pressure of ﬂoading devices,
patients with diabetic plantar foot ulcers who were
randomized to total-contact cast had a higher and
faster rate of wound healing than those randomized toah a l f - s h o eo rt oar e m o v a b l ec a s tw a l k e r .
12
3. By far, most research on the ef ﬁcacy of pressure off-
loading has been conducted in patients with diabeticfoot ulcers, where peripheral neuropathy is a commonoccurrence. The effectiveness of pressure of ﬂoading in
patients with foot ulcers wi thout diabetes is unknown.
However, proper pressure of ﬂoading may be bene ﬁcial
in allowing tissue growth and wound healing and maybe considered in patients with CLTI and foot ulcersw h od on o th a v ed i a b e t e s .P r o p e rp r e s s u r eo f ﬂoading is
individually tailored to min imize excessive or persis-
t e n tp r e s s u r ea tt h es i t eo ft h ef o o tu l c e r .Recommendations for Pressure Of ﬂoading for CLTI
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1A1. Patients with CLTI and diabetic foot ulcers should receive pressure of ﬂoading, when possible, to promote
tissue growth and wound healing.1-9
1 B-R2. Patients with PAD and previous diabetic foot ulcer s should be referred for customized footwear that
accommodates, protects, and ﬁts the shape of their feet.10-12
2b C-EO3. Patients with CLTI and foot ulcers who do not ha ve diabetes may be considered for pressure of ﬂoading to
promote tissue growth and wound healing.Gornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042554

10.3.2. Wound Care and Management of Infection for CLTI
Synopsis
Management of infection and local wound care are a
critical component to the care of patients with CLTI andmust be implemented concurrently with revasculariza-tion ( Figures 6 and 7 ) .T h em u l t i s p e c i a l t yc a r et e a mf o r
CLTI should include expertise in developing a wound careplan along with its implementation. Components of
wound care in CLTI are outlined in Table 17 .B e y o n d
wound care, hyperbaric oxygen therapy has been studiedin the context of wound healing for CLTI as an adjunctivetherapy to revascularization and may have a limited rolein this population.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Foot infection, particularly among patients with dia-
betes, can progress rapidly, and thus, prompt diagnosis
and initiation of therapy, including antibiotics andoften surgical management, are key to reducing thehigh probability of both amputation and death.
15Pa-
tients with CLTI should be promptly evaluated andtreated to prevent infections with resistant microor-ganisms and amputation.
16Surgical debridement is
recommended for foot infections involving abscess,
gas, or necrotizing fasciitis. After successful revascu-
larization, most patients with gangrene of the foot areevaluated for minor amputation with staged or delayedprimary closure or surgical reconstruction whenfeasible.
1-3Negative pressure wound therapy (NPWT),
which applies vacuum suction to a wound dressing, canbe used to achieve wound healing after revasculariza-tion and minor (ie, digit or partial foot) amputation
when primary or delayed secondary closure is not
feasible.
4,5,8Of note, studies of the ef ﬁcacy of NPWT
have focused primarily on patients with diabetes withvery limited data in the patient population withoutdiabetes. For patients with uncomplicated osteomye-litis, one can consider treating primarily withantibiotics.2. The management of patients with CLTI and nonhealing
wounds should include coordinated multidisciplinaryefforts for both revascularization and evidence-basedwound care with the goal of complete wound healingand a functional limb ( Table 17 ). One study showed a
limb salvage rate of 100% at 3 years in a cohort of pa-tients with CLTI who achieved complete wound heal-
ing with endovascular revascularization followed by
dedicated wound care.
6Repeated wound assessment
during follow-up allows for close evaluation of thenature of the wound to help determine the best local
wound care, identify signs of bio ﬁlm or infection, and
allow for frequent debridement.
7,17-20Debridement
techniques include: surgic al, sharp/conservative-
sharp, autolytic, mechanical, enzymatic, chemical/
mechanical/surfactant, and biosurgical/larval
methods.21Speci ﬁcs regarding the approach to local
wound care are highly variable and depend on thestatus and location of the wound. Particularly amongpatients with diabetes, the pathophysiological mecha-nisms of nonhealing wounds are complex and multi-factorial and include neuropathy, infection, ischemia,and abnormal foot biomechanics and structure. In
general, wound dressing products should be used to
maintain a moist wound bed while controlling anydrainage and exudate and avoiding tissue maceration.Some wound care products also help manage bio ﬁlm.
Optimizing the wound-hea ling environment also in-
cludes medical optimizatio n, such as smoking cessa-
tion, good glycemic control, cardiovascular risk factormodi ﬁcation, and nutrition. Thus, management of
these patients is optimal when delivered by a multi-
specialty care team. Adjunctive wound care therapiesincluding NPWT and biologics (eg, topical cytokineointments, skin substitutes, cell-based therapiesintended to optimize wound healing) are oftenconsidered when wounds do not heal or progress afterstandard wound care. To date, no RCTs or high-qualityRecommendations for Wound Care and Management of Infection for CLTI
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In patients with CLTI, prompt management of foot in fection with antibiotics, debridement, and other
surgical management is recommended.1-5
1 C-LD2. In patients with CLTI with nonhealing wounds, wo und care should be provided to optimize the wound-
healing environment after revascularization with the goal of complete wound healing.6-10
2b B-NR3. In patients with CLTI with nonhealing diabetic foot ulcers, hyperbaric oxygen therapy may be considered
to assist in wound healing after revascularization.11-14JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2555

studies have focused on wound-healing adjuncts in
such patients other than NPWT wound therapy.Limited data have shown the ef ﬁcacy of NPWT as an
adjunctive therapy for treatment of nonhealingwounds (eg, diabetic foot ulcers, CLTI wounds).
8-10
Updated international consensus guidelines on
wound care therapies have been recently published.21
3. Numerous studies of various sizes, including some RCTs
and some meta-analyses, have evaluated the impact ofhyperbaric oxygen therapy on limb salvage and woundhealing. Variability in terms of methodology, types ofwounds, and presence of ischemia exists. Many of thestudies focused on limb salvage for diabetic foot ulcers,without evidence of severe PAD. One small RCT that
focused on patients with foot ulcers and PAD (ABI <0.80
or TBI <0.70), for whom no revascularization was
planned, showed a signi ﬁcant decrease in ulcer area at
6 weeks, but no signi ﬁcant differences in ulcer size at6 months, complete ulcer healing at 6 weeks or 6
months, and major or minor amputations.
11In a slightly
larger study that included 70 patients with severelyischemic foot ulcers, the amputation rate was 9% in thetreatment group and 33% in the control group.
12How-
ever, in a larger longitudinal study of diabetic foot ul-
cers, the use of hyperbaric oxygen therapy did not result
in better wound healing.13A recent systematic review
and meta-analysis of hyperbaric oxygen therapy fordiabetic foot ulcers report ed reduction in major ampu-
tation with hyperbaric oxygen therapy, although noreduction in minor amputation or overall mortality.
14
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy may be considered as anadjunctive therapy to revascularization for wound
healing in the context of CLTI and diabetic foot ulcers.
10.3.3. Approach to the “No Option ”Patient With CLTITABLE 17 Components of Wound Care for Patients With CLTI
nRevascularization for adequate perfusion (see Section 10.2 ,“Revascularization for CLTI ”)
nDebridement of nonviable tissue
nManagement of infection, in ﬂammation, or both
nPressure of ﬂoading, when appropriate (see Section 10.3.1 ,“Pressure Of ﬂoading for CLTI ”)
nMaintaining conducive wound-healing envir onment (ie, local wound care, dressings) (see Section 10.3.2 ,“Wound Care and Management of Infection for
CLTI ”)
nPain control
nMedical optimization of host factors (eg, smoking cessation, glycemic control) (see Section 5 ,“Medical Therapy and Preventive Foot Care for Patients with
PAD ”)
nOptimization of tissue growth
nControl of edema
CLTI indicates chronic limb-threatening ischemia; PAD, peripheral artery disease.
Recommendations for Approach to the “No Option ”Patient With CLTI
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
2b B-R1. In patients with CLTI for whom revascularization is not an option and a lack of out ﬂow to the foot is
observed, the usefulness of prostanoids is uncertain.1-3
2b B-NR2. In patients with CLTI for whom revascularization is not an option, arterial intermittent pneumatic
compression devices may be considered to augment w ound healing or amelior ate ischemic rest pain.4-7
2b B-NR3. In patients with CLTI for whom arterial revasc ularization is not an option and a lack of out ﬂow to the foot
is observed, venous arterialization ma y be considered for limb preservation.8-12Gornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042556

Synopsis
CLTI is a severe manifestation of PAD. Within this
heterogenous patient population are those with no op-tions for revascularization after evaluation by a multi-specialty care team (see Section 10.1 ,“Team-Based Care
for CLTI ”). A 2020 review proposed a classi ﬁcation system
for such patients with no opt ions for revascularization
based on anatomic categories ( Table 18 ).
13Beyond wound
care (see Section 10.3.2 ,“Wound Care and Management of
Infection for CLTI ”), few treatments are available for
these patients, including t he emerging technique of
venous arterialization,8-12as well as intermittent pneu-
matic compression devices4-7and prostanoids.1-3Experi-
mental therapies, such as angiogenic gene therapy andgrowth factors, are unavailable in clinical practice and are
beyond the scope of this document. Lumbar sympathec-
tomy is a palliative procedure that disrupts the efferentautonomic pain pathways and reduces distal sympatheticvasoconstriction.
14-16Lumbar sympathectomy is per-
formed surgically or pharmacologically under CT guid-ance but is rarely performed in current clinical practiceand is largely of historical interest.
14-16
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Prostanoids have been considered as potential treat-
ment for “no-option ”CLTI for >30 years because they
have multiple potential bene ﬁcial properties affecting
circulation, including vasodilation, inhibition ofplatelet aggregation and activation, and vascularendothelial cytoprotection.
1,2Examples of this group of
mediators include prostaglandin E1, prostacyclin, and
iloprost, a synthetic prostacyclin analog (unavailable in
the United States). In a meta-analysis of 18 trials,prostanoids were associated with a signi ﬁcantly lower
risk of major amputations (OR: 0.77 [95% CI: 0.63-0.93]), although no signi ﬁcant effect on total amputa-
tions was observed.
1A Cochrane systematic review
analyzed 33 studies and reported low-quality evidenceof no clear bene ﬁto fp r o s t a n o i d so n cardiovascular
mortality reduction (risk ratio [RR]: 0.81 [95% CI: 0.41-
1.58]), high-quality evidence of no effect on the totalamputation reduction (RR: 0.97 [95% CI: 0.86-1.09]),
and moderate-quality evidence that adverse eventswere more frequent with prostanoids (RR: 2.11 [95% CI:1.79-2.50]), including gastr ointestinal adverse effects,
headaches, and hypotension.
2Moderate-quality evi-
dence demonstrated that prostanoids reduced ischemicrest pain (RR: 1.30 [95% CI: 1.06-1.59]) and were asso-
ciated with improved wound healing (RR: 1.24 [95% CI:
1.04-1.48]) compared with placebo.
2The ef ﬁcacy of
these agents has been called into question because oftheir marginal results and low quality of evidencewithin some trials but may be considered when noother viable treatments are available, particularly forshort-term relief of pain.
3
2. An arterial intermittent pneumatic compression device
(“arterial pump ”) is an alternative treatment for pa-
tients with no-option CLTI and involves the sequentialinﬂation and de ﬂation of pneumatic cuffs placed on the
leg, which increases arterial blood ﬂow, peak systolic
blood ﬂow, and pulse volume. Intermittent pneumatic
compression is proposed to work through multiplemechanisms: increasing a rteriovenous pressure
gradient, reversing vasomotor paralysis, and
enhancing nitric oxide release.
5A2 0 1 5s y s t e m a t i cr e -
view by Moran et al4suggested that intermittent
pneumatic compression devices may provide modestclinical bene ﬁt( s p e c i ﬁcally, decreased amputation
rates and improved QOL) in patients with CLTI ineli-gible for revascularization, with potential bene ﬁts
appearing to outweigh the low risk associated withtheir use. However, risk of signi ﬁcant bias was noted in
available data, along with relatively small populations
studied.
4Zaki et al6performed a retrospective analysis
of 187 patients with no-option CLTI who used a speci ﬁc
sequential intermittent pneumatic compression deviceversus those who did not use intermittent pneumaticcompression. They showed reduced minor amputation,prolonged amputation-free survival, and improved restpain, but no signi ﬁc a n tr e d u c t i o ni nm a j o ra m p u t a -
tion.
6A subsequent systematic review consisting of 9
studies of intermittent pneumatic compression showedTABLE 18 Anatomic Classi ﬁcation of the No-Option Patient With CLTI
TypeConventional
Revascularization
Options No or Poor Option Description
I. Desert foot pedal anatomy No No option No patent pedal vessels
Should be staged with the WIfI17and GLASS18staging classi ﬁcations (including pedal modi ﬁer)
II. Inadequate venous conduit No No option Patent pedal target without adequate venous conduit for bypass
No endovascular options
III. Extensive tissue loss Yes Poor option Tissue loss with exposure of vital structures precluding limb salvage of a functional foot
Modiﬁed from page 189 of Kim et al.13Copyright 2021 by SAGE Publications, by permission of SAGE Publications.
CLTI indicates chronic limb-threatening ischemia; GLASS, Global Limb Anatomic Staging System; and WIfI, wound, ischemia, and foot infection.JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2557

r e d u c t i o ni nr e s tp a i nw i t hu l c e r - h e a l i n gr a t e so f2 6 %
and limb salvage rate of 58% to 83% at 1 to 3 monthsand 58% to 94% at 1.5 to 3.5 years.
7Based on these
data, intermittent pneumatic compression may beuseful in patients with no-option CLTI to reduce
ischemic pain, improve wou nd healing, and increase
amputation-free survival but does not appear to reducerate of major amputation. Further research iswarranted.
3. Venous arterialization is a novel approach to the no-
option patient that involves connecting a proximal ar-tery to a distal vein (deep or super ﬁcial), then disrupting
the valves of the vein and allowing arterial blood to
enter the foot through the venous system. These pro-
cedures have been performed via open, percutaneousdeep vein arterialization (pDVA) and hybrid tech-niques.
8,9A systemic review of 15 studies (768 patients)
reported a pooled limb salvage rate of 75% at 12 monthsin an analysis of 9 studies of pDVA and 6 studies ofsuper ﬁcial techniques.
8A 2019 review of all 3 techniques
reported limb salvage rat es for open (25%-100%) in
184 cases, percutaneous (60%-71%) in 22 cases, andhybrid (46%-69%) venous arterialization in 62 cases.
10
Midterm results from the ALPS (Alkmaar, Leipzig,
Paris, Singapore) Multicen ter Study of 32 patients hav-
ing undergone pDVA reported a 24-month limb salvager a t eo f7 8 %a n d7 3 %c o m p l e t ew o u n dh e a l i n g .
9
An interim report of the PROMISE I trial evaluated apDVA technique (LimFlow) in a single-arm prospectivestudy of 10 patients and showed a 6-month 100%amputation-free and 30% complete wound-healingresult.
11,12Subsequent publication of the PROMISE I
trial reported on 31 patients with a procedural success
rate of 75% and amputation-free survival rates at 6a n d1 2m o n t h so f7 4 %a n d7 0 % ,r e s p e c t i v e l y .
12
10.3.4. Amputation for CLTI
Recommendations for Amputation for CLTI
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In patients with CLTI who require amputation, eval uation should be performed by a multispecialty care
team ( Table 15 ) to assess for the most distal level of amputation that facilitates healing and provides
m a x i m a lf u n c t i o n a la b i l i t y .1-6
1 C-EO2. In patients with CLTI, primary amputation is indica ted when life over limb is the prevailing consideration
and clinical factors suggest the threat ened limb to be the cause of the patient ’s instability (eg, ischemia,
metabolic derangement, o r advanced infection).
1 C-EO3. In patients with CLTI, a patient-centered approach using objective classi ﬁcation of the threatened limb,
patient risk, and anatomic pattern of disease combi ned with patient and family goals is recommended to
identify those patients in whom primary amputat ion or palliative manag ement is appropriate.
1 C-EO4. In patients with CLTI undergoing minor amputation ( ie, inframalleolar level ), a customized program of
follow-up care that can include local wound care, pressure of ﬂoading, serial evaluation of foot biome-
chanics, and use of therapeutic footwear is recommended to prevent wound recurrence.
2a C-EO5. For patients with CLTI, retrospect ive assessment of institutional out comes (including amputation) with
objective limb threat classi ﬁcation tools can be useful for quality improvement.
Synopsis
CLTI is associated with poor health-related QOL
regardless of treatment approach.7,8Preservation of a
functional limb with a shoeable foot is the primary goal forthe patient presenting with CLTI in whom ambulation is
anticipated after the intervention. The use of a prosthetic
and resumption of walking are the 2 outcomes with thegreatest impact on QOL among amputees.
9-12Additional
f a c t o r sa s s o c i a t e dw i t hQ O La m o n gp a t i e n t sw h oh a v eu n d e r g o n ea m p u t a t i o na r es h o w ni n Table 19 .W h e ns u -
perﬁcial ulceration without inf ection is present, timely
revascularization with restoration of adequate perfusionmay permit healing of the soft-tissue envelope. However,when more extensive tissue loss or infection is present,
with involvement of bone or soft tissues, then debride-
ment with bone amputation and primary or delayedcoverage may be necessary to facilitate healing and func-tion. A multispecialty care team facilitates collaborationGornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042558

necessary to achieve this resource-intensive goal
(Table 15 ). Although it is clear that preservation of
maximal tissue of the limb is the goal, no evidence from
RCTs is available to guide the selection process for theoptimal level of amputation that is likely to heal in theface of chronic ischemia. This void of evidence representsan opportunity for future research.
7At a population level,
prevention of limb loss is an important public health goal,and a 20% reduction in nontraumatic amputation by theyear 2030 has been proposed by the AHA.
8
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Multispecialty care team collaboration ( Table 15 )i s
essential to meet the broad needs of the patient withCLTI (see Section 10.1 ,“Team-Based Care for CLTI ”).
When amputation is required, c linical factors including
the presence of infection and the degree of ischemiaand tissue loss ultimately i mpact the level of amputa-
tion necessary to achieve the goal of a healed wound
with a functional limb. Evidence exists to support theuse and effectiveness of this team evaluation paradigmboth before amputation and in the postoperative, long-term phase.
1-6For clinical circumstances in which
these services are unavailable, consideration should begiven to transferring the patient ’s care to such a facil-
ity, except in instances of lif e-threatening sepsis due to
foot infection when immediate amputation is war-
ranted (see Recommendation 2). When clinicallyappropriate, and using a team-based approach, minor
amputation below the malleolus may be possible forpatients in whom continued ambulation is anticipated.Regarding a perceived bio mechanical advantage of
different foot amputations (eg, transmetatarsal ampu-
t a t i o n ,C h o p a r t ,L i s f r a n c ) ,c o n ﬂicting evidence exists
regarding the comparative bene ﬁto ff o o tl e v e la m p u -
tation relative to a functional below-the-knee ampu-tation. Patient education, appropriate extremitypressure of ﬂoading with prescription shoes, and foot
surveillance clinical examinations are essential toreducing wound recurrence, especially in patients withdiabetes and neuropathy who have had CLTI. Wound
complications, including at the stump site, and hospi-
tal readmission rates among patients with CLTI un-dergoing major limb amputation are high and re ﬂect
the burden of advanced CVD, diabetes, residual infec-t i o n ,o n g o i n gs m o k i n g ,a n do t h e rm e d i c a lc o m o r b i d -ities in this patient population.
13-15Implementation of
a plan for management of diabetes and medicalcomorbidities by the multispecialty care team at the
time of amputation is important.
2. Clinical situations can occur in which life over limb is
the prevailing factor and emergency primary amputa-tion is indicated. This includes the patient withadvanced soft-tissue inf ection where emergency
amputation for sepsis control is the only viable optionto avoid patient death or in the setting of severemetabolic derangements attributable to extensive tis-
sue necrosis.
3. The use of published classi ﬁcation tools (WIfI,
GLASS)
16,17may facilitate the objective assessment and
documentation of the no-option patient ( Table 18 ). A
nonrandomized series reported healing ratesapproaching 50% in a cohort with CLTI with a non-revascularization strategy focused on local woundmanagement.
18,19With or without an associated
wound, the patient ’s subjective experience of pain is
an important individual variable and must be appro-priately assessed and managed. When revasculariza-tion is not an option, local wound managementmeasures fail, or pain is pro hibitive, primary amputa-
tion may be the only option to relieve the pain. Inaddition, a subgroup of patients presenting with CLTIwill have severe comorbid conditions that contribute
to the decisional matrix tha tr e v a s c u l a r i z a t i o nm a yn o t
be physiologically tolerated and render primaryamputation as the most appropriate clinical option.Other clinical situations may exist in which primaryamputation for CLTI is considered, including theTABLE 19 Major Factors In ﬂu e n c i n gQ O LA m o n gA m p u t e e s
Patient factors
Higher QOL
nWalking with prosthesis
nAbove knee (versus below knee) amputation
nFemale sex (especially if age <60 y)
nLiving at home
Lower QOL
nAge>65 y
nPresence of diabetes
nIsolation (being homebound)
Professional-controlled factors
nTiming of amputation
nInformed decision-making
nPostamputation support
Data derived from Davie-Smith et al10and Suckow et al.9Reprinted with permission
from Creager et al.8Copyright 2021 American Heart Association, Inc.
QOL indicates quality of life.JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2559

p a t i e n tw i t hs u c he x t e n s i v et i s s u ed e s t r u c t i o nt h a t
surgical resection would re sult in a nonfunctional ex-
tremity, the patient who is nonambulatory or entirelybedbound at baseline because of chronic comorbidity(eg, stroke, persistent vegetative state), or the patient
with a short life expectancy (eg, advanced age,
untreatable cancer). Prima ry amputation should only
be considered after thorough review by an experiencedrevascularization specialist in consultation with themultispecialty care team ( Table 15 ) and in discussion
with the patient and family members incorporating thepatient ’s input and goals of care.
4. Patients with CLTI who have undergone a minor
(inframalleolar) amputation are at risk for wound-
related complications, including infection, as well asfuture major amputation.
13,20For such patients, a
customized program of longitudinal care is essential,including local wound care and appropriate foot pres-sure of ﬂoading to facilitate wound healing. Evidence
for the use of adjuncts, such as tendon Achilleslengthening and tendon balancing, are supported
largely by observational studies.
21-25After the initial
healing, wound recurrence rates are high in neuro-ischemic patients, and diligent long-term patient sur-veillance and meticulous foot care, including periodic
assessment of biomechanics and need for therapeuticfootwear, is essential to prevent these events (seeSection 5.8 ,“Preventive Foot Care for PAD, ”and
Section 10.3.3.1 ,“Pressure Of ﬂoading for CLTI ”). One
or more members of the multispecialty care team
(Table 15 ) who has expertise in this domain should be
designated with this role and should be engaged forlongitudinal follow-up car e of the patient after minor
amputation for CLTI.
5. Application of objective classi ﬁcation tools (eg, WIfI,
GLASS) in program evaluation and hospital-levelreporting of outcomes in the CLTI patient cohort en-
hances the ability to objectively describe, predict, and
compare clinical presentation and outcomes. Obser-vational and registry data exist to validate the use ofWIfI and GLASS classi ﬁcation models
26-30and, to this
end, a broader application of these tools is suggested.Moreover, the practice of maintaining and reviewingthese data may have an impact in identifying oppor-tunities to improve quality and outcomes (eg, limb
salvage, mortality) at the level of the individual clini-
cian, multispecialty care team, and hospital system.The VQI is a multicentered patient registry that collects
clinical, procedural, and outcome data from partici-pating centers and includes patients treated for CLTI.
31
Although data on center-speci ﬁco u t c o m e sr e l a t i v et o
other participating centers regionally and nationally
are provided to the individual participating programs
for purposes of quality improvement, the center-speci ﬁc data from the VQI are not publicly reported.
Other quality improvement registries that include pa-tients with CLTI (with emphasis on endovascular pro-cedures) are the NCDR PVI Registry and the Society ofInterventional Radiology VIRTEX data registry.
31,32
Although none of these registries report data pub-
licly, they do allow participating centers to benchmark
procedural outcomes compared with other centers.Various examples of public re porting of procedural and
chronic cardiovascular condition care outcomes areavailable, including the Society of Thoracic Surgeryreporting of coronary artery bypass and valve surgeryand the NCDR reporting of outcomes after percuta-neous coronary intervention and MI.
33,34Much has
been written about potential consequences of a poorly
designed reporting struc ture that may perversely
impact patient care.35Decades of experience across
these domains may be helpful in the design of a futurepublic reporting structure for CLTI outcomes,including amputation.
11. ACUTE LIMB ISCHEMIA
ALI is one of the most treatable and potentially devas-
tating presentations of PAD. T imely recognition of acute
arterial occlusion as the cause of an ischemic, cold,painful, and/or numb limb is crucial to successful treat-ment. The writing committee has used a standard de ﬁ-
nition of ALI in which symptom duration is <2w e e k s
1,2
(Figure 8 ). Category I ALI refers to a viable limb that is
not immediately threatened. Category II refers to thethreatened but salvageable limb. The category IIa limb is
marginally threatened and salvageable, if promptly
treated. The category IIb lim b is immediately threatened
and requires immediate revascularization if salvage is tobe accomplished. The category III limb is irreversiblydamaged, in which case resultant major tissue loss orpermanent nerve damage is inevitable.
2The category III
limb is nonsalvageable.Gornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042560

11.1. Initial Clinical Evaluation and Diagnostic Approach to ALI
Recommendations for the Initial Clinical Evaluation and Diagnostic Approach to ALI
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 C-EO1. Patients with ALI should be evaluated on an emergency basis by a clinician with suf ﬁcient experience to
assess limb viability and implement appropriate therapy.
1 C-LD2. In patients with suspected ALI, the initial clinica l evaluation should rapidly assess limb viability and
potential for salvage and can be achieved without non invasive imaging (ie, duplex ultrasound, CTA, or
MRA).1-6
2b C-EO3. In patients with ALI who have a complicated history of revascularization procedures, it may be reasonable
to obtain noninvasive imaging (ie, duplex ultras ound, CTA, or MRA) before deciding to proceed with
revascularization.
FIGURE 8 Algorithm for Diagnosis and Management of ALI
Colors correspond to Table 3 . ALI indicates acute limb ischemia; CV, cardiovascular; and ECG, electrocardiogram.JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2561

Synopsis
ALI is a vascular emergency that requires rapid recog-
nition, assessment of limb viability, and timely imple-mentation of therapy to maximize the possibility of limbsalvage. If local expertise is unavailable for rapid assess-
ment and potential revascularization, patient transfer to a
facility with such resources sh ould be considered. Initial
evaluation of ALI includes targeted history and physicalexamination, including use of a continuous wave Dopplerdevice at the bedside to assess arterial and venous signalsin the limb ( Figure 8 ). In most cases, treatment for ALI is
implemented without the need for additional noninvasiveimaging studies (ie, duplex ultrasound, CTA, MRA).
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Patients with ALI should be evaluated on an emergency
basis by a clinician with suf ﬁcient experience to assess
limb viability and implement appropriate therapy. Ifsuch expertise is locally unavailable, transfer of thepatient with ALI to a facility with such resources shouldbe strongly considered. The more advanced the degree
of ischemia, the more rapidly the communication
(including communication about potential patienttransfer) needs to occur.
2. ALI is a medical emergency that must be recognized
rapidly. The time constraint is attributable to the
period that skeletal muscle will tolerate ischemia —
about 4 to 6 hours.
5Af o c u s e dh i s t o r ya n dp h y s i c a l
examination with rapid assessment of limb viabilityand ability to restore arterial blood ﬂow should be
performed by a clinician able to either complete therevascularization or rapidly triage the patient to onew h oi sa b l et od os o .
2Lower-extremity symptoms in
ALI can include pain, loss of sensation, and loss of
function. The longer these symptoms are present, theless likely the possibility of limb salvage.
3,4Bedside
clinical assessment for ALI includes querying thepatient for symptom characteristics and duration and
pain intensity and assessment of severity of motor andsensory de ﬁcits to distinguish a threatened (category
IIa/IIb) from an irreversibly ischemic, nonsalvageablelimb (category III). A handheld continuous wave
Doppler device is used to assess the limb because of the
inaccuracy of pulse palpation in this setting and toallow for identi ﬁcation of venous signals.
6The loss of
an arterial signal on continuous wave Doppler indicatesthat the limb is threatened. The absence of both arterialand venous Doppler signals indicates that the limb maybe irreversibly damaged (category III) and non-salvageable. Comorbidities should be identi ﬁed and
managed aggressively, but this must not delay therapy.
In most cases, additional noninvasive imaging studies(ie, duplex ultrasound, C TA, or MRA) are unnecessary
to implement treatment for ALI except in unusual cir-cumstances that may alter revascularization strategyand timing, such as a suspected aortic dissection, in thesetting of multiple previous revascularization proced-ures, or in other unusual clinical scenarios. Even in the
setting of rapid and effective revascularization, the
1-year morbidity and mortality rates associated withALI are high.
1,3,7
3. Patients who present with ALI and a history of lower
extremity revascularizati on procedures are a unique
challenge. Decision-making for revascularizationstrategy in these patients may be improved by obtain-ing noninvasive imaging (ie, duplex ultrasound, CTA,
MRA) in an expedited manner to de ﬁne the anatomy
and whether ALI is caused by occlusion at the site ofprevious revascularization (eg, bypass graft or stent) orat another site.
11.2. Management of ALI
11.2.1. Revascularization for ALI
Recommendations for Revascularization for ALI
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1A1. In patients with ALI and a salvageable limb, revascu larization (endovascula ro rs u r g i c a l ,i n c l u d i n g
catheter-directed thrombolysis) is indicated to prevent amputation.1-5
2a C-EO2. In patients with ALI and a salvageable limb who are treated with catheter-directed thrombolysis,
adjunctive revascularization (ie, endovas cular or surgical) procedures can be useful.
2b C-LD3. In patients presenting with ALI from chemotherapeutic or prothrombotic viral states, it may be
r e a s o n a b l et ot a k eam o r ed e l i b e r a t ep l a nning strategy before engaging in a de ﬁnitive revascularization
or medical treatment plan.6-14
3: Harm C-EO4. In patients with ALI with a nonsalvageable limb , revascularization of nonviable tissue should not be
performed.Gornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042562

Synopsis
Revascularization is indicated in patients with ALI and
a salvageable limb to prevent irreversible tissue damage
and major amputation ( Figure 8 ). Both surgical throm-
boembolectomy and catheter-based thrombolysis are
effective therapies for ALI. Historically, surgical throm-
boembolectomy, generally performed via arterial cutdown and an embolectomy catheter (eg, Fogarty cath-eter), was the primary mode of revascularization in thesetting of ALI.
15Catheter-based thrombolysis was the
initial method of endovascular revascularization for ALI,and the utilization of additional endovascular therapies totreat ALI has advanced signi ﬁcantly in recent years.
Ultrasound-accelerated, catheter-based thrombolysis and
newer techniques including pharmacomechanical andvacuum-assisted percutane ous mechanical thrombec-
tomy have expanded the endovascular armamentariumfor the treatment of ALI.
16-20Patient-speci ﬁca n d
anatomic factors and local resource availability areimportant in selecting the rev ascularization strategy for
the individual patient with ALI. All patients should be
monitored for compartment syndrome and reperfusion
injury (see Section 11.2.2 ,“Adjunctive Therapies to Mini-
mize Tissue Loss in ALI ”). After initial revascularization
to address the thrombosis, de ﬁnitive treatment of any
underlying culprit lesion can be useful to optimize pro-cedural success and prevent ALI recurrence.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Revascularization is indicated in patients with ALI and
a salvageable limb (categories I, IIa and IIb) ( Figure 8 ).
Multiple large observational studies have documentedthe association of ALI with high rates of mortality andlimb loss
21-25for which expedited recognition, classi-
ﬁcation, and rapid treatment to remove clot by either
open or endovascular means is critically important.The use of catheter-based thrombolysis as a revascu-
larization strategy has been extensively studied within
the context of ALI. Despite this, assessment of thecomparative effectiveness of catheter-based throm-bolysis versus open surgery is complicated by variabledeﬁnitions of ALI in the literature. Four RCTs
1,3-5
comparing catheter-based thrombolysis to surgery as
well as multiple meta-analyses2,26,27have shown
similar limb salvage rates between the 2 approaches,
with higher rates of bleeding associated with throm-
bolysis. Several of these RCTs included patients withrelatively chronic ischemia. Several observationalstudies have shown improved in-hospital outcomesand long-term outcomes with endovascular therapiescompared with open surgery, even after controlling forbaseline differences in patient characteristics.
28,29
Acuity and severity of ALI are both factors to consider
in the decision to pursue thrombolysis.1,3-5For patientswith ALI attributable to bypass graft occlusion within
14 days of the primary operation and a salvageablelimb, the bene ﬁts of thrombolysis should be weighed
against the risks of surgical site bleeding. Beyondconventional catheter-directed thrombolysis,
ultrasound-accelerated ca theter-based thrombolysis
has also been studied in the context of ALI.
19,30-32The
single RCT comparing this technique to standard
catheter-based thrombolyt ic therapy showed a signi ﬁ-
cantly lower thrombolysis time and total amount oflytic agent required for treatment of ALI.
19,32More
recently, case series have provided initial support forthe use of mechanical thrombectomy (eg, pharmaco-
mechanical or vacuum assisted) in the treatment of
ALI.
16-18 ,20,30These studies have reported excellent
safety using these newer techniques, with limb salvagerates exceeding 80% in most of these series.
16-18
2. Multiple retrospective nonrandomized studies and 2
RCTs3,33-42have shown that catheter-directed throm-
bolysis can be effective for bypass grafts and nativearteries that are occluded for <14 days ’duration.
Thrombolysis unmasks culprit lesions that can then be
addressed depending on the nature of the lesion (eg,diffuse or focal atherosclerotic lesions, retained valves,neointimal hyperplasia). Durability of revasculariza-tion after thrombolysis can be improved by revascu-larization of the underlying culprit lesion usingadjunctive surgical and end ovascular procedures such
as endarterectomy, patch angi oplasty, interposition or
jump extension grafts, or PTA without or with stenting.
However, if the duration of arterial occlusion exceeds14 days in duration, the bene ﬁts of thrombolysis are
minimal, and attempts at revascularization using othertechniques are generally necessary.
36,38
3. Additional evaluation and consideration before revas-
cularization may be warra nted in patients with ALI
associated with or induced by systemic proin-
ﬂammatory and prothrombot ic states. For example,
the development of ALI as a complication of cancerchemotherapy has been described among patients un-dergoing treatment for different primary malignancieswith regimens including platinum-based agents.
8-11In
recent years, case reports of arterial thrombotic eventsassociated with use of tyrosine kinase inhibitors havebeen reported.
12During the coronavirus disease-2019
(COVID-19) pandemic, dozens of case reports and case
series described the development of ALI among pa-tients infected with SARS-CoV-2, including among pa-tients with severe multiorgan failure.
6,7,13,14In these
complex cases of ALI associated with underlying sys-temic illness or its treatment, additional considerationmay include further noninva sive imaging (ie, duplex
ultrasound, CTA, MRA), evaluation of clinical stability
and comorbidities, and multidisciplinary discussion inJACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2563

determining the treatment approach (medical therapy
with anticoagulation and monitoring rather than initialrevascularization). During this evaluation, such pa-tients are treated with unfractionated heparin, in theabsence of contraindications (see Section 11.2.3 ,
“Anticoagulation for ALI ”).
4. For patients with category III ALI (irreversible
ischemia), amputation of nonviable tissue should beperformed as the index pro cedure rather than revas-cularization. The risks associated with revasculariza-
tion (ie, procedural complications) outweigh thepotential bene ﬁt if the extremity is already insensate
or immobile because of prolonged ischemia. In addi-tion, in this setting, reperfusion and circulation of
ischemic metabolites can result in multiorgan failure
and cardiovascular collapse.
43
11.2.2. Adjunctive Therapies to Minimize Tissue Loss in ALI
Recommendations for Adjunctive The rapies to Minimize Tissue Loss in ALI
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
RECOMMENDATIONS
1 C-EO1. Patients with ALI should be monitored and treated for compartment syndrome with fasciotomy after
revascularization (endovascular or surgical, including catheter-directed thrombolysis) to prevent thesequelae of reperfusion injury and need for amputation.
2a B-NR2. In patients with ALI with a threatened but salvageable limb (ie, category IIa or IIb), prophylactic fasciotomy
is reasonable based on the clinical ﬁndings.1,2
2a C-EO3. In patients with ALI and prolonged ischemia in whom reva scularization (endovascular or surgical, including
catheter-directed thrombolysis) is performed , concurrent and early amputation can be bene ﬁcial to avoid
the morbidity of reperfusion.
Synopsis
Patients presenting with AL I experience elevated rates
of morbidity, mortality, and limb loss.3,4Timely revascu-
larization is the goal but, even with this, poor outcomes
may be unavoidable. Adjuncts to limb revascularization,including fasciotomy for compartment syndrome andamputation, may be necessary to minimize tissue loss andpreserve maximal limb function. Unlike patients in whomtraumatic limb injury has occu rred, elevated compartment
pressures are generally not present at the time of initialpresentation of ALI. In ALI, with partial or complete
revascularization, reperfusion injury can occur. The
mechanism is attributed to the release of oxygen-free
radicals that create a leaky capillary process, resulting inelevated compartment pressures in the limb. Compart-ment syndrome is more likely to occur with prolongedperiods of ischemia and more severe ischemia. Short pe-riods of ischemia may be poorly tolerated in the patientwith no preexisting PAD, although longer periods of
ischemia may result in less cellular injury for the patient
with chronic PAD and preexisting collateralization.
5-7The
diagnosis of compartment syndrome is based on the his-tory (including the duration of ischemia) and associatedclinical ﬁndings (eg, elevated serum creatine kinase) but,
in certain circumstances, may be con ﬁrmed with the
measurement of elevated compartment pressures.Although compartment syndrome can also occur in the
thigh, the lower leg is by far the most common site.
7Ah i g h
clinical suspicion is necessa ry to permit early diagnosis of
compartment syndrome so that timely decompression
with surgical fasciotomy can i nterrupt the progression of
ischemia leading to tissue necrosis.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. The lower extremity muscles are at risk for reperfusion
injury in patients with ALI.1Reperfusion to ischemic
muscles can cause cellular edema within fascial com-
partments, resulting in increased compartment pres-
sure and the development of clinical compartmentsyndrome. Monitoring for compartment syndrome is animportant component of care for patients with ALI. Forpatients with clinical evidence of compartment syn-drome (ie, based on physic al examination, elevated
serum creatine kinase, or both), immediate fasciotomyis indicated. Prompt action to measure compartment
pressures and to perform fasciotomy of all involved
compartments is an effective approach. In patients whopresent with ALI with prolonged or severe tissueischemia, fasciotomy is indicated to mitigate thesequelae of reperfusion syndrome.
2. In patients with ALI with a threatened but salvageable
limb (category IIa or IIb), the performance ofGornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042564

prophylactic fasciotomies at the time of revasculariza-
tion or early in the presentati on (ie, before the clinical
development of elevated compartment pressures) canavoid a later delay in diagnosis of compartment syn-drome and devastating complications associated with
this delayed diagnosis (eg, tissue necrosis, infection,
limb amputation, and systemic metabolic toxicity).Observational studies have shown that early fas-ciotomy is associated with lower rates of limb ampu-tation and shorter hospita lization among patients with
ALI.
1,2The bene ﬁts of prophylactic fasciotomy should
be balanced with the knowledge that the procedure isassociated with a risk of complications, including dys-
esthesia related to nerve injury, incisional site com-
plications, and infection.
8If, after fasciotomy, minimal
tissue bulge is noted, resolves, or both with systemicdiuresis and leg elevatio n, early delayed primary
closure of fasciotomy incisions may mitigate associatedwound morbidity. For those patients in whom delayedprimary closure is not possible, NPWT is an effectiveoption to reduce patient discomfort and facilitate
incisional closure or prepare the wound bed for skin
graft placement. Diligent postacute wound care shouldbe used to mitigate wound complications, facilitateincisional management to cl osure, and obtain the ul-
timate goal of restoratio no ft h ef u n c t i o n a ll i m b .3. In patients with ALI who present with prolonged
ischemia and dense regional symptoms, concurrentamputation with revascularization can be clinicallyappropriate (eg, the patient presenting with acutemultilevel occlusion with severe in ﬂow and out ﬂow
disease and prolonged leg ischemia with limited func-
tional motor activity of the foot or calf). In such cases,partial or complete revascularization can be performedwith in ﬂow with or without out ﬂow revascularization,
followed by concurrent major amputation of severelyischemic issue, leaving the amputation site open for adelayed closure at a later time. Such an approach ex-pedites the conduct of the procedure and allows for
surveillance of tissue viability over the days after
revascularization. A delayed primary closure can thenoccur when the patient is more clinically stable and thelevel of tissue viability has been declared. Other sce-narios in which this approach can be bene ﬁcial include
patients with poor premorbid functional status orfrailty or severe comorbidity pro ﬁle (eg, CAD, heart
failure, CKD) for whom the metabolic burden of limb
ischemia and reperfusion injury may be poorly
tolerated.
11.2.3. Anticoagulation for ALI
Recommendation for Anticoagulation for ALI
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
1 C-EO1. In patients with ALI, regardless of cause or anatomi c level of occlusion, system ic anticoagulation with
unfractionated heparin should be administ ered on diagnosis unless contraindicated.
Synopsis
All patients with ALI should be evaluated for revas-
c u l a r i z a t i o n ,a n da l ls h o u l dr e c e i v em e d i c a lt h e r a p y
while revascularization plans are being determined(Figure 8 ). The mainstay of medical therapy for ALI is
systemic anticoagulation, typically with unfractionatedheparin, which serves to mitigate the impact of ischemiaand help the process of thrombolysis begin. However,certain patients may not be candidates for anti-coagulation for ALI, including those at high risk of
bleeding, or those with ALI associated with aortic
dissection or major vascular trauma.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. In the absence of contraindication (eg, active bleeding
or high bleeding risk), therapeutic doses of intravenousunfractionated heparin are given to patients with ALI on
diagnosis. Intravenous unfractionated heparin is
preferred to other agents given its short half-life and
titratability, especially as revascularization plans arebeing determined. The goal o fs y s t e m i ca n t i c o a g u l a t i o n
is to limit the propagation of existing thrombus anddistal embolization. Heparin may also provide an anti-inﬂammatory effect that lessens ischemia. This prac-
tice is widely accepted, although no randomized trialshave established improved outcomes with anti-
coagulation versus none or comparing different classes
of systemic anticoagulants. For patients with a historyof heparin-induced thrombocytopenia, a directthrombin inhibitor rather than heparin can be admin-istered.
1,2Anticoagulation for ALI should be weighed
against the risk of bleeding.JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2565

11.3. Diagnostic Evaluation for the Cause of ALI
Synopsis
ALI is a vascular emergency that requires rapid diag-
nosis and management, including timely revasculariza-tion to reperfuse the ischemic limb (see Section 11.1 ,
“Initial Clinical Evaluation and Diagnostic Approach to
ALI, ”and Section 11.2.1 ,“Revascularization for ALI ”).
Causes of ALI include acute thrombosis of native vessel orbypass grafts in the setting of known diagnosis of PAD,arterial embolism, dissection, and trauma.
5Determina-
tion of the potential underlying cause of ALI is crucial toimplementing therapies to prevent recurrent events, butsuch an evaluation should not delay revascularizationand other potentially limb-saving therapies. Potential
underlying causes of ALI are listed in Table 20 .
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Underlying PAD is a common cause of ALI. Among pa-
tients with PAD, the rate of ALI is 0.8% to 1.7%.
6-8Most
patients with ALI attributable to underlying PAD have ahistory of lower extremity r evascularization, amputa-
tion, or lower baseline ABI values ( #0.60).
8Thus, for all
patients presenting with ALI, a targeted historyregarding known PAD, includ ing previous revasculari-
zation procedures, should be obtained. Beyond PAD,other key causes of ALI include native vessel thrombosis
and systemic embolization.
6Thus, the history and re-
view of systems should focus on uncovering clinicalevidence of these other conditions that can result inALI, including atrial ﬁbrillation, MI or cardiomyopathy
with left ventricular thrombus, valvular heart disease,aortic disease, and hypercoagulable states. A recenthistory of vascular access (eg, femoral access for cath-eterization) should be obtained. The history should also
capture current medications, including anticoagulants
(and when last taken) and family history of thrombosis.The review of systems is performed to capture thosethat can be clues to these underlying conditions (eg,heart palpations, tachycardia, recent chest pain, symp-toms of heart failure, asymmetric leg swelling).Recently, the association of ALI with COVID-19 infection
has been established, thus querying for known recentC O V I D - 1 9i n f e c t i o na sw e l la sf e v e r ,c o u g h ,a n do t h e rsigns of viral infectio n should be included.
9,10AlthoughRecommendations for Diagnostic Evaluation for the Cause of ALI
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 C-EO1. In patients with ALI, a comprehensive medical his tory and physical examination should be performed to
determine the cause of thrombosis or embolization.
2a C-LD2. In patients with ALI, testing for a cardiovas cular cause of thromboembolism can be useful.1-4
TABLE 20 Underlying Causes of ALI1,4-6,9-18
Underlying PAD with acute thrombosis
nThrombosis at sites of arterial stenosis
nArtery to artery embolization
nThrombosis of previous bypass grafts
nArterial stent thrombosis
Cardiac embolization
nAtrial ﬁbrillation (ie, left atrial/appendage thrombus)
nOther intracardiac thrombus (eg, left ventricular thrombus due to
cardiomyopathy)
nInfective endocarditis
nValvular heart disease (eg, mitral stenosis)
nIntracardiac shunt including paradoxical embolization across a patent
foramen ovale
Iatrogenic/access site-related thrombosis (eg, postfemoral access for
catheterization)
Aortic or arterial dissectionArterial traumaArterial aneurysm-related thromboembolism (eg, popliteal artery)Hypercoagulable states
nAntiphospholipid antibody syndrome
nHeparin-induced thrombocytopenia
nCancer-associated arterial thrombosis
nOthers
Cancer therapy-associated thrombosis
nPlatinum-based chemotherapy
nTyrosine kinase inhibitors
nOthers
Other systemic proin ﬂammatory states
nVasculitis
nSepsis
nViral illness, including COVID-19
nOther infectious processes
Popliteal artery entrapment syndrome
ALI indicates acute limb ischemia; COVID-19, coronavirus disease-2019; and PAD,
peripheral artery disease.Gornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042566

the physical examination initially focuses on rapid tar-
geted evaluation of the ischemic limb(s) to plan revas-cularization (see Section 11.2.1 ,“Revascularization for
ALI”), further comprehensive examination includes
assessment of the heart (eg, for irregular rhythm, pres-
ence of murmur) and lungs (eg, for signs of congestive
heart failure or infection), l imb swelling (eg, suggesting
deep vein thrombosis with paradoxical embolization),and examination for other signs of systemic illness.Potential underlying causes of ALI are presented inTable 20 .
2. With rare exceptions, treatment of ALI should not be
delayed for testing for the underlying cause. For pa-
tients in whom underlying PAD is the unclear cause of
the ALI event, additional ev aluation can be useful to
identify a potential underlying cause and implementtherapy to prevent recurrence. The association betweenatrial ﬁbrillation and lower extremity embolic events
has been well described, and long-term oral anti-coagulation in such patients is important to preventrecurrence.
1Beyond the history and physical examina-
tion, testing for an underlying cardiac cause can include
electrocardiography or add itional heart rhythm moni-
toring to detect atrial ﬁbrillation, electrocardiography todetect evidence of MI, and echocardiography to further
determine whether a cardiac cause for thromboembo-lism exists, such as valvular vegetation, left atrial or leftventricular thrombus, or intracardiac shunt.
1Landry
et al4reported a series of patients with lower extremity
ALI unattributable to underlying PAD or aortic pathol-
ogy and found a signi ﬁcant prevalence of atrial ﬁbrilla-
tion (30%) as well as abnormalities on echocardiography(84 patients imaged), including any valvular disease(61%), intracardiac thrombus (11%), and mitral stenosis(4%). A presumed major cardioembolic cause (atrialﬁbrillation, mitral stenosis, or intracardiac thrombus)
was identi ﬁed in 44% of patients with presumed car-
dioembolic ALI.
4Beyond cardiac evaluation, additional
testing, such as imaging of the aorta (ie, for thrombus oraneurysm) or evaluation for hypercoagulable states, isdetermined based on the initial clinical evaluation andsuggestive ﬁndings in the history, physical examina-
tion, or those identi ﬁed during treatment for ALI (ie,
ﬁndings on catheter angiography obtained at the time of
revascularization).
12. LONGITUDINAL FOLLOW-UP OF PAD
Recommendations for Longitudinal Follow-Up of PAD
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
General Principles
1 C-EO1. In patients with PAD, with or without revascularizat ion, longitudinal follow-up with routine clinical
evaluation, including assessment of limb symptoms and functional status, lower extremity pulse and foot
assessment, and progress of risk fa ctor management, is recommended.
1 C-EO2. In patients with PAD, coordination of care among clinicians to improve the management of PAD and
comorbid conditions and to optimiz e patient outcomes is recommended.
Functional Status and QOL
1 B-NR3. In patients with PAD, with or without revascularization, periodic assessment of functional status as well
as overall health-related QOL as a component of longitudinal follow-up is recommended.1-6
Medical Therapy
1A4. In patients with PAD, long-term use of GDMT to prevent MACE and MALE is recommended.7-12
Postrevascularization Follow-Up
1 C-LD5. In patients with PAD who have undergone lower extremity revascularization (ie, surgical and/or endo-
vascular), longitudinal follow-up that includes perio dic clinical evaluation of lower extremity symptoms
and pulse and foot assessment is recommended.13-16JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2567

Synopsis
PAD is a chronic medical condition. A comprehensive
care plan for patients with PAD includes periodic clinicale v a l u a t i o nb yah e a l t hc a r ep r o f e s s i o n a lw i t he x p e r i e n c ein the care of patients with vascular disease and coordi-nation of care among other clinicians. Ongoing care fo-
cuses on cardiovascular and limb risk reduction (ie,
prevention of MACE and MALE) with medical therapy,optimizing functional stat us and QOL with structured
exercise and, when indicated, revascularization. Patientswith PAD who have undergone revascularization needongoing surveillance, although the optimal frequency ofsurveillance after revascularization has yet to bedetermined.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Because patients with PAD are at risk for MACE
(including MI, stroke, and death) and because tradi-tional cardiovascular risk factors are strongly asso-
ciated with the development and progression of PAD,aggressive risk factor management is an importantcomponent of longitudinal care (see Section 5 ,
“Medical Therapy and Preventive Foot Care for the
Patient With PAD ”). GDMT and risk factor manage-
ment seek to slow the progression of PAD and pre-vent MACE and MALE (see Section 5 ,“Medical
Therapy and Preventive Foot Care for the PatientWith PAD ”). Beyond risk factor management, moni-
toring limb symptoms and fu nctional status allows
for assessment of the degree of functionalimpairment, participation in a structured exercise
program (see Section 6 ,“Exercise Therapy for PAD ”),
and worsening of symptoms that would warrantevaluation for revascula rization. Longitudinal
follow-up care also includes lower extremity pulseand foot assessment and opportunities for education
regarding good foot care a nd awareness of signs of
worsening PAD, including CLTI. Speci ﬁc timing, in-
tervals, or both of routine follow-up visits is tailoredto the patient-speci ﬁc clinical context, including
severity of disease and degree of functional limita-tion, history, and timing of previous revasculariza-tion procedures, and need for adjustment ofmedications to optimize GDMT and control risk
factors.
2. Because of the complexity of PAD, a multispecialty
care team approach promotes collaboration andavoids potential duplication of care.
13,14,29-32Coor-
dination of care is partic ularly important for risk
factor management (ie, diabetes, hypertension,smoking, dyslipidemia) to optimize outcomes forthese patients. Saratzis et al
33estimated that man-
agement of cardiovascular risk factors in patients
with PAD, including optimal LDL-C, good bloodpressure control, smoking cessation, and antiplatelettherapy, could lead to an a verage of 6.3 MACE-free
years gained in a population of patients observedlongitudinally for medical management of PAD.
3. In a chronic disease such as PAD, assessment of
functional status and QOL provides a meaningful1 C-LD6. In patients with PAD who have undergone lower extremity revascularization (ie, surgical, endovascular,
or both) with new lower extremity signs or symptom s, ABI and arterial duplex ultrasound is recom-
mended.14,17-20
2a B-R7. In patients with PAD who have undergone infrainguin al, autogenous vein bypass graft(s) without new
lower extremity signs or symptoms, it is reasonable to perform ABI and arterial duplex ultrasound sur-
veillance within the ﬁrst 1 to 3 months postprocedure, then repeat at 6 and 12 months, and then
annually.13,14,20-22
2a C-LD8. In patients with PAD who have undergone endovascul ar procedures without new lower extremity signs or
symptoms, it is reasonable to perform ABI and arte rial duplex ultrasound su rveillance within the ﬁrst 1 to
3 months postprocedure, then repeat at 6 and 12 months, and then annually.17,19,20
2b B-NR9. In patients with PAD who have undergone infrainguin al, prosthetic bypass graft(s) without new lower
extremity signs or symptoms, the effectiveness of ABI and arterial duplex ultrasound surveillance isuncertain.
14,20,23,24
Telehealth
2a C-LD10. For patients with PAD, telehealth can be an alternative mode for vascular evaluation and management
and longitudinal follow-up, but the use of these vi sits should be consistent with the urgency of pre-
senting symptoms.25-28Gornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042568

way to determine the impact of therapies.34In pa-
tients with PAD, the perception of walking capacity,pain, and social and emotional implications of livingwith PAD are all important QOL measures. Althoughassessment of functional status and QOL can inform
and be incorporated into the clinical assessment,
validated questionnaires have been developed andcan be administered via patient electronic healthrecords or via a computer in the waiting area, thuseliminating the need for data entry by health carepersonnel. These assessments can be incorporatedinto clinical follow-up visits. A scienti ﬁc statement
on patient-reported health status measures for PAD
has been published.
35Examples of validated QOL
tools for PAD include:
/C15VasculQoL-6,1a shortened version of the PAD-
speci ﬁc instrument VascuQOL, which was
found to be a valid and responsive instrumentfor the measurement of health-related QOL inPAD.
/C15PADQOL, a PAD-speci ﬁc QOL measure, which mea-
sures the impact of PAD and the patient ’ss u b -
jective experience.
2
/C15PAQ, a PAD-speci ﬁc health status measure. The PAQ
Summary Score has been correlated to the ABI,and a lower PAQ Summary Score has beenfound to be associated with an increased like-lihood of PAD among patients with suspectedPAD symptoms.
3-5
Simple tools to screen for depression, such as the
Patient Health Questionnaire-9, can also be imple-
mented.36Depression has been recognized as preva-
lent among patients with PAD and has beenrecognized as a risk ampli ﬁer (see Section 4.1 ,“Am-
pliﬁers of Cardiovascular and Limb-Related Risk in
Patients With PAD) that is associated with adverseoutcomes.
37-39
Functional status can be assessed informally (ie, byasking about subjective pain-free and maximal walkingdistances and ability to walk in daily life and partici-pate in vocational and recreational activities), orthrough objective functional assessments (exercisetreadmill ABI testing or 6MWT). The 6MWT assessesthe distance a patient can walk in a 6-minute periodand is a submaximal test of endurance capacity, aerobic
capacity, or both. The 6MWT is simple and easy to
perform at a low cost and can be done by those who aredeconditioned, elderly, or frail.
6
4. GDMT for PAD and evidence-based recommenda-
tions for speci ﬁc elements of GDMT are discussed in
Section 5 ,“Medical Therapy and Preventive Foot
Care for the Patient With PAD ”(Figure 4 ). Main-
taining patient-speci ﬁcG D M Tt op r e v e n tM A C Ea n dMALE is an important element of longitudinal care
for patients with PAD. Lipid-lowering therapiesreduce the risk of MACE and MALE events in pa-tients with PAD.
7,8,40,41Statin therapy post-
operatively is associated with improved survival in
patients who undergo lower extremity bypass sur-
gery for CLTI.42Antiplatelet and antithrombotic
therapies are fundamental to prevent MACE,including MI, ischemic stroke, and death, but havealso shown to be important in reducing limb eventsin stable PAD and postrevascularization.
9-11,43-48Man-
agement of diabetes and hypertension are bothimportant components of care for patients with PAD,
and glycemic control is espe cially important for pa-
tients with CLTI and nonhealing wounds.
12,49-51
Maintenance of smoking cessation is critical for pa-
tients with PAD (see Section 5.4 ,“Smoking Cessation
for PAD ”).
5-9. Both endovascular and surgical revascularization can
be complicated by restenosis caused by neointimalhyperplasia as well as other complications. Neo-
intimal hyperplasia involves thickening of the tunica
intima of an artery and involves the proliferation andmigration of medial smooth muscle cells into a regionas it becomes stenotic in response to revasculariza-tion.
15,16The goal of routine surveillance after
revascularization is to identify intervention siteswith signi ﬁcant restenosis that are at risk for failure,
even in the absence of signs or symptoms (ie, to
maintain patency). A reduction in the ABI of >0.15
from a previous value has been proposed to detectrevascularization failure, but ABIs should be used incombination with duplex ultrasound to improvesensitivity for detecting signi ﬁcant restenosis.
14,19If
issues with revascularization are identi ﬁed early,
prompt reintervention can improve outcomes (eg,patency). To date, limited data show clinical bene ﬁts
of a duplex ultrasound surveillance program. How-
ever, Venermo et al
13created a consensus document
from a systematic literature review toward the goalof providing standardized surveillance post-revascularization based on a combination of evi-dence and authors ’expertise. Multisocietal
appropriate use criteria for vascular testing havebeen published that include criteria for surveillance
after endovascular and surgical revasculariza-
tion.
17,20In 2018, the Society for Vascular Surgery
published practice guidelines for follow-up aftervascular surgery arterial procedures based on obser-vational studies, committe e consensus, and indirect
evidence.
14These guidelines address surveillance
after endovascular and surgical revascularization andby arterial segment. Clinical evidence to support the
use of duplex ultrasound for surveillance afterJACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2569

revascularization is most robust for surveillance of
infrainguinal autogenous vein bypass grafts,including randomized trials and a meta-analysis withmixed results.
18,21,22However, duplex ultrasound
surveillance of prosthetic bypass grafts has not been
shown to reliably predict graft failure as it does in
vein graft surveillance.23,24Low ﬂo wi so f t e na ni n -
dicator of an increased risk of graft failure, especiallyin prosthetic bypass grafts.
23Multiple observational
studies have evaluated duplex ultrasound surveil-lance after endovascular revascularization byanatomic level (ie, aortoiliac, femoropopliteal,infrapopliteal vessels).
14,19The ﬁnding of a severe
stenosis within a bypass graft or at the site of an
endovascular procedure often requires additionalintervention and revascularization, especially in thepresence of new lower extremity signs or symptoms,but is beyond the scope of this document.
10. Telehealth (eg, virtual visits) is an alternative mode
of clinical evaluation and care for patients withPAD, but its usefulness in cl inical practice depends
on the patient ’s clinical presentation and stability of
symptoms. Use of telehealth can be appropriate forevaluation and follow-up of patients with subclini-cal or chronic symptomatic PAD. However, it is oflimited use for the evaluation of patients with moresevere symptoms, including those with suspectedCLTI (including lower extremity wounds) or ALI, inwhich case an in-person visit is more appropriate.
Early observational stud ies reporting experience
with use of telehealth for patients with stable,symptomatic PAD have been published.
25-27As c i -
entiﬁc statement on the use of telehealth for car-
diovascular care has been published.28
13. EVIDENCE GAPS AND ADVOCACY PRIORITIES
FOR PAD
13.1. Evidence Gaps
In performing its evidence review and in developing the
present guidelines, the writing committee identi ﬁed
these critical evidence gaps in the ﬁeld of PAD to which
priority should be given for the development and fundingof future studies:
1. Studies to determi ne the potential bene ﬁto f
screening for PAD among asymptomatic, at-risk pa-tients with subsequent implementation of therapies
for cardiovascular risk reduction.
2. Clinical trials to determine the potential bene ﬁto f
medical therapies to prevent MACE and MALE amongpatients with asymptomatic PAD.
3. Further clinical trials to determine the optimal anti-
platelet and antithrombotic regimen (drug and dose,duration) for patients with PAD who have undergone
revascularization procedures.
4. Studies of use of telehealth technology to improve
access to SET for PAD compared with facility-basedsupervised exercise.
5. Development of effective new medical therapies to
improve functional status in patients with PAD.
6. Development of patient-reported metrics of func-
tional status and walking performance for PAD andintegration of these metrics in outcome measures ofstudies of revascularization.
7. RCT or registry data analyzing outcomes for patients
with chronic symptomatic PAD (claudication and
other ischemia-related exertional leg symptoms)
treated by exercise thera py, endovascular manage-
ment, and surgical management with hard outcomes,including MACE and MALE. Further analyses of suchdata to identify which patients are most likely tobene ﬁt from revascularization , to predict the degree
of functional response, and to develop evidence-based algorithms for selection of patients for revas-
cularization and determination of modality of revas-
cularization. Such data could be incorporated intofuture decision aids and other tools for shareddecision-making discussions with patients regardingrevascularization.
8. Expanding the evidence base with comparative effec-
tiveness studies of different endovascular devices (eg,
balloon angioplasty, drug-coated balloon angioplasty,
atherectomy) for revascularization of PAD.
9. Studies investigating the effect of shared decision-
making strategies in the management of chronicsymptomatic PAD and CLTI.
10. Studies comparing outcomes of different revasculari-
zation strategies for CLTI for optimal wound healingand limb salvage (ie, in-line ﬂow, angiosome, wound
blush, etc.).
11. Studies to determine ideal timing and modality for
vascular surveillance testing postrevascularizationprocedures.
13.2. Advocacy Priorities
Through its review of the literature, discussions, and
guideline development, the writing committee identi ﬁed
priorities for advocacy in the ﬁeld of PAD. This list of
priorities could be incorporated into future collaborativemultispecialty and multisocietal initiatives to advance
toward a future of improved recognition and diagnosis,
access to care, and clinical outcomes for patients with thisimportant CVD.
1. Collaborative teamwork among all specialties that care
for patients with PAD to expand access to care andimprove patient outcomes.Gornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042570

2. Implementation of the PAD National Action Plan,
which outlines 6 strategic goals to improve awareness,detection, and treatment of PAD nationwide.
1This is
recognized as a top advocacy priority by the writingcommittee.
3. Broad dissemination and implementation of these
guidelines to improve detection of and care for pa-tients with PAD (and particularly CLTI) with the goal ofreducing nontraumatic limb amputation in the UnitedStates by 20% by 2030.
2
4. Focus on quality outcomes in PAD (prescription of
GDMT, smoking cessation, prevention of readmissionsafter revascularization). A suggested next step includes
the development of AHA Get With The Guidelines ini-
tiatives to address disparities in prevention and riskfactor modi ﬁcation between PAD and CAD.
5. Improved access to, affordability of, and thus utiliza-
tion of SET for PAD, including development of hybridprograms that have some facility-based and somecommunity- and home-based component, includinguse of telehealth.
6. Implementation of interventions to address the racial
disparity gap in amputation and revascularization andto improve limb and cardiovascular outcomes for allpatients with PAD. The potential impact of such in-terventions on clinical out comes should be studied and
reported.
7. Use of telehealth and remo te patient-monitoring de-
vices (eg, wearables, smart devices) to provide PAD-
related care for underserved areas and patient pop-
ulations and for populations that require more inten-sive follow-up, such as CLTI.
8. Creation of a national registry of nontraumatic lower
extremity amputation to identify opportunities forimprovement and to unmask factors associated withdisparities in treatment. Such a registry would providedata to track the AHA goal of 20% reduction in ampu-
tations by 2030.
2
PRESIDENTS AND STAFF
American College of CardiologyCathleen Biga, MSN, FACC, PresidentCathleen C. Gates, Chief Executive Of ﬁcer
R i c h a r dJ .K o v a c s ,M D ,M A C C ,C h i e fM e d i c a lO f ﬁcer
Mindy J. Saraco, MHA, Director, Clinical Policy and
Guidelines
Grace D. Ronan, Senior Production and Operations
Manager, Clinical Policy Publications
Leah Patterson, Project Manager, Clinical Content
Development
American Heart Association/American College of CardiologyAbdul R. Abdullah, MD, National Director, Guideline
Science and Methodology
Shae Martinez, MLS, Reference Consultant, Medical
Librarian
American Heart Association
Joseph C. Wu, MD, PhD, FAHA, President
Nancy Brown, Chief Executive Of ﬁcer
Mariell Jessup, MD, FAHA, Chief Science and Medical
Ofﬁcer
Nicole Aiello Sapio, EdD, Executive Vice President,
Ofﬁce of Science Strategies and Operations
Radhika Rajgopal Singh, PhD, Senior Vice President,
Ofﬁce of Science and Medicine
Prashant Nedungadi, BPharm, PhD, Vice President,
Science and Medicine, Clinical Guidelines
Barbara Entl, MD, Science and Medicine Advisor, Science,
Medicine and Health
Jody Hundley, Senior Production and Operations
Manager, Scienti ﬁc Publications, Of ﬁce of Science
OperationsJACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2571

REFERENCES
PREAMBLE
1.Committee on Standards for Developing Trustworthy
Clinical Practice Guidelines, Institute of Medicine (US) .
Clinical Practice Guidelines We Can Trust . National
Academies Press; 2011 .
2.Committee on Standards for Systematic Reviews of
Comparative Effectiveness Research, Institute of Medi-cine (US) .Finding What Works in Health Care: Standards
for Systematic Reviews . National Academies Press;
2011 .
3.Anderson JL, Heidenreich PA, Barnett PG, et al.
ACC/AHA statement on cost/value methodology inclinical practice guidelines and performance measures:a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Perfor-mance Measures and Task Force on Practice Guide-lines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;63:2304 –2322 .
4.ACCF/AHA Task Force on Practice Guidelines.
Methodology Manual and Policies from the ACCF/
AHA Task Force on Practice Guidelines .A m e r i c a n
College of Cardiology and American Heart Associ-a t i o n ;2 0 1 0 .A c c e s s e dN o v e m b e r5 ,2 0 2 1 . https://
professional.heart.org/-/media/PHD-Files/Guidelines-and-Statements/methodology_manual_and_policies_ucm_319826.pdf
5.Halperin JL, Levine GN, Al-Khatib SM, et al. Further
evolution of the ACC/AHA clinical practice guideline
recommendation classi ﬁcation system: a report of the
American College of Cardiology/American Heart As-sociation Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2016;67:1572 –1574 .
6.Arnett DK, Goodman RA, Halperin JL, et al. AHA/
ACC/HHS strategies to enhance application of clinicalpractice guidelines in patients with cardiovascular
disease and comorbid conditions: from the American
Heart Association, American College of Cardiology,and US Department of Health and Human Services.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;64:1851 –1856 .
7.Levine GN, O ’Gara PT, Beckman JA, et al. Recent
innovations, modi ﬁcations, and evolution of ACC/AHA
clinical practice guidelines: an update for our constit-uencies: a report of the American College of Cardiol-ogy/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical
Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;73:1990 –
1998 .
1.4. Scope of the Guideline
1.Allison MA, Ho E, Denenberg JO, et al. Ethnic-spe-
ciﬁc prevalence of peripheral arterial disease in the
United States. Am J Prev Med . 2007;32:328 –333.
2.Tsao CW, Aday AW, Almarzooq ZI, et al. Heart dis-
ease and stroke statistics 2022 update: a report fromthe American Heart Association. Circulation . 2022;145:
e153 –e639 .
3.Song P, Rudan D, Zhu Y, et al. Global, regional, and
national prevalence and risk factors for peripheral ar-tery disease in 2015: an updated systematic review and
analysis. Lancet Glob Health . 2019;7:e1020 –e1030 .
4.Eid MA, Mehta K, Barnes JA, et al. The global
burden of peripheral artery disease. J Vasc Surg
.
2023;77:1119 –1126.e1 .5.Gerhard-Herman MD, Gornik HL, Barrett C, et al.
2016 AHA/ACC guideline on the management of pa-tients with lower extremity peripheral artery disease: areport of the American College of Cardiology/Amer-
ican Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice
Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2017;69:e71 –e126 .
6.Fleisher LA, Fleischmann KE, Auerbach AD, et al.
2014 ACC/AHA guideline on perioperative cardiovas-cular evaluation and management of patients under-going noncardiac surgery: a report of the AmericanCollege of Cardiology/American Heart Association TaskForce on Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2014;64:e77 –e137.
7.Levine GN, Bates ER, Bittl JA, et al. 2016 ACC/AHA
guideline focused update on duration of dual anti-platelet therapy in patients with coronary artery dis-ease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on ClinicalPractice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2016;68:1082 –
1115.
8.Whelton PK, Carey RM, Aronow WS, et al.
2017 ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/
ASPC/NMA/PCNA guideline for the prevention,detection, evaluation, and management of high bloodpressure in adults: a report of the American College ofCardiology/American Heart Association Task Force onClinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2018;71:
e127 –e248 .
9.Grundy SM, Stone NJ, Bailey AL, et al. 2018
AHA/ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/ADA/AGS/APhA/
ASPC/NLA/PCNA guideline on the management ofblood cholesterol: a report of the American College ofCardiology/American Heart Association Task Force onClinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;73:
e285 –e350 .
10.Kleindorfer DO, Tow ﬁghi A, Chaturvedi S, et al.
2021 guideline for the prevention of stroke in patients
with stroke and transient ischemic attack: a guideline
from the American Heart Association/American StrokeAssociation. Stroke . 2021;52:e364 –e467 .
11.Virani SS, Newby LK, Arnold SV, et al. 2023 AHA/
ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA guideline for the man-agement of patients with chronic coronary disease: areport of the American Heart Association/American
College of Cardiology Joint Committee on Clinical
Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2023;82:833 –
955.
12.Davis MM, Taubert K, Benin AL, et al. In ﬂuenza
vaccination as secondary prevention for cardiovasculardisease: a science advisory from the American HeartAssociation/American College of Cardiology. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2006;48:1498 –1502 .
13.Aboyans V, Criqui MH, Abraham P, et al.
Measurement and interpretation of the ankle-
brachial index: a scienti ﬁc statement from the
American Heart Association. Circulation .2 0 1 2 ; 1 2 6 :
2890 –2909 .
14.Klein AJ, Feldman DN, Aronow HD, et al. SCAI
expert consensus statement for aorto-iliac arterial
intervention appropriate use. Catheter Cardiovasc
Interv . 2014;84:520 –528.
15.Mills JL Sr, Conte MS, Armstrong DG, et al. The
Society for Vascular Surgery Lower Extremity Threat-
ened Limb Classi ﬁcation System: risk strati ﬁcationbased on wound, ischemia, and foot infection (WIfI).
J Vasc Surg . 2014;59:220 –234. e1-2 .
16.Society for Vascular Surgery Lower Extremity
Guidelines Writing Group, Conte MS, Pomposelli FB,et al. Society for Vascular Surgery practice guidelinesfor atherosclerotic occlusive disease of the lower ex-
tremities: management of asymptomatic disease and
claudication. J Vasc Surg . 2015;61(Suppl 3):2S –41S.
17.Fox CS, Golden SH, Anderson C, et al. Update on
prevention of cardiovascular disease in adults with
type 2 diabetes mellitus in light of recent evidence: ascienti ﬁc statement from the American Heart Associ-
ation and the American Diabetes Association. Circula-
tion. 2015;132:691 –718.
18.Barua RS, Rigotti NA, Benowitz NL, et al. 2018 ACC
expert consensus decision pathway on tobacco cessa-tion treatment: a report of the American College of
Cardiology Task Force on Clinical Expert Consensus
Documents. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2018;72:3332 –3365 .
19.Treat-Jacobson D, McDermott MM, Bronas UG,
et al. Optimal exercise programs for patients withperipheral artery disease: a scienti ﬁc statement from
the American Heart Association. Circulation . 2019;139:
e700 –e710 .
20.Conte MS, Bradbury AW, Kolh P, et al. Global
vascular guidelines on the management of chroniclimb-threatening ischemia. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg .
2019;58(Suppl 1):S1 –S109.e33 .
21.Treat-Jacobson D, McDermott MM, Beckman JA,
et al. Implementation of supervised exercise therapy
for patients with symptomatic peripheral artery dis-
ease: a science advisory from the American Heart As-sociation. Circulation . 2019;140:e700 –e710 .
22.Misra S, Shishehbor MH, Takahashi EA, et al.
Perfusion assessment in critical limb ischemia: princi-ples for understanding and the development of evi-dence and evaluation of devices: a scienti ﬁc statement
from the American Heart Association. Circulation .
2019;140:e657 –e672 .
23.Bailey SR, Beckman JA, Dao TD, et al. ACC/AHA/
SCAI/SIR/SVM 2018 appropriate use criteria for pe-
ripheral artery intervention: a report of the American
College of Cardiology Appropriate Use Criteria Task
Force, American Heart Association, Society for Car-diovascular Angiography and Interventions, Society ofInterventional Radiology, and Society for VascularMedicine. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;73:214 –237.
24.Feldman DN, Armstrong EJ, Aronow HD, et al.
SCAI guidelines on device selection in aorto-iliac
arterial interventions. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv .
2020;96:915 –929.
25.Creager MA, Matsushita K, Arya S, et al. Reducing
nontraumatic lower-extremity amputations by 20% by2030: time to get to our feet: a policy statement fromthe American Heart Association. Circulation . 2021;143:
e875 –e891 .
26.Smolderen KG, Alabi O, Collins TC, et al. Advancing
peripheral artery disease quality of care and outcomesthrough patient-reported health status assessment: ascienti ﬁc statement from the American Heart Associ-
ation. Circulation . 2022;146:e286 –e297 .
27.Takahashi EA, Schwamm LH, Adeoye OM, et al. An
overview of telehealth in the management of cardio-
vascular disease: a scienti ﬁc statement from theGornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042572

American Heart Association. Circulation . 2022;146:
e558 –e568 .
28.ElSayed NA, Aleppo G, Aroda VR, et al. Introduc-
tion and methodology: standards of care in diabetes-2023. Diabetes Care . 2023;46:S1 –S4.
29.Woo K, Siracuse JJ, Klingbeil K, et al. Society for
Vascular Surgery appropriate use criteria for manage-ment of intermittent claudication. J Vasc Surg .
2022;76:3 –22.e1 .
30.Hawkins BM, Li J, Wilkins LR, et al. SCAI/ACR/
APMA/SCVS/SIR/SVM/SVS/VESS position statement on
competencies for endovascular specialists providingCLTI care. Vasc Med . 2022;27:405 –414.
31.Allison MA, Armstrong DG, Goodney PP, et al.
Health disparities in peripheral artery disease: a sci-entiﬁc statement from the American Heart Association.
Circulation . 2023;148:286 –296.
32.Norgren L, Hiatt WR, Dormandy JA, et al. Inter-
society consensus for the management of peripheral
arterial disease (TASC II). Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg .
2007;33(Suppl 1):S1 –S75.
33.Creager MA, Kaufman JA, Conte MS. Clinical
practice. Acute limb ischemia. N Engl J Med . 2012;366:
2198 –2206 .
34.Creager MA, Belkin M, Bluth EI, et al. 2012 ACCF/
AHA/ACR/SCAI/SIR/STS/SVM/SVN/SVS key data ele-ments and de ﬁnitions for peripheral atherosclerotic
vascular disease: a report of the American College ofCardiology Foundation/American Heart Association
Task Force on Clinical Data Standards (Writing Com-
mittee to Develop Clinical Data Standards for Periph-eral Atherosclerotic Vascular Disease). J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2012;59:294 –357.
35.Rutherford RB, Baker JD, Ernst C, et al. Recom-
mended standards for reports dealing with lower ex-tremity ischemia: revised version. J Vasc Surg .
1997;26:517 –538.
36.Patel MR, Conte MS, Cutlip DE, et al. Evaluation
and treatment of patients with lower extremity pe-
ripheral artery disease: consensus de ﬁnitions from
Peripheral Academic Research Consortium (PARC).J Am Coll Cardiol . 2015;65:931 –941.
37.Taylor GI, Palmer JH. The vascular territories
(angiosomes) of the body: experimental study andclinical applications. Br J Plast Surg . 1987;40:113
–141.
38.Menard MT, Farber A, Assmann SF, et al. Design
and rationale of the Best Endovascular Versus BestSurgical Therapy for Patients With Critical LimbIschemia (BEST-CLI) trial. J Am Heart Assoc . 2016;5:
e003219 .
39.Conte MS, Geraghty PJ, Bradbury AW, et al. Sug-
gested objective performance goals and clinical trialdesign for evaluating catheter-based treatment ofcritical limb ischemia. J Vasc Surg . 2009;50:1462 –
1473.e1461-1463 .
40.Darling JD, McCallum JC, Soden PA, et al. Pre-
dictive ability of the Society for Vascular SurgeryWound, Ischemia, and foot Infection (WIfI) classi ﬁca-
tion system following infrapopliteal endovascular in-
terventions for critical limb ischemia. J Vasc Surg .
2016;64:616 –622.
41.Cull DL, Manos G, Hartley MC, et al. An early
validation of the Society for Vascular Surgery lowerextremity threatened limb classi ﬁcation system. J Vasc
Surg. 2014;60:1535 –1541.42.Zhan LX, Branco BC, Armstrong DG, et al. The
Society for Vascular Surgery lower extremity threat-ened limb classi ﬁcation system based on Wound,
Ischemia, and foot Infection (WIfI) correlates with riskof major amputation and time to wound healing. J Vasc
Surg. 2015;61:939 –944.
43.Beropoulis E, Stavroulakis K, Schwindt A, et al.
Validation of the Wound, Ischemia, foot Infection
(WIfI) classi ﬁcation system in nondiabetic patients
treated by endovascular means for critical limbischemia. J Vasc Surg . 2016;64:95 –103.
1.5. Class of Recommendations and Level of
Evidence
1.ACCF/AHA Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Method-
ology Manual and Policies from the ACCF/AHA Task Force
on Practice Guidelines. Ameri can College of Cardiology and
American Heart Association. 2010. Accessed November 5,2021. https://professional.heart .org/-/media/PHD-Files/
Guidelines-and-Statements/methodology_manual_and_policies_ucm_319826.pdf
2.1. Recognizing Clinical Subsets of PAD
1.McDermott MM, Greenland P, Liu K, et al. Leg
symptoms in peripheral arterial disease: associatedclinical characteristics and functional impairment.JAMA . 2001;286:1599 –1606 .
2.Hirsch AT, Criqui MH, Treat-Jacobson D, et al. Pe-
ripheral arterial disease detection, awareness, andtreatment in primary care. JAMA . 2001;286:1317 –1324 .
3.Schorr EN, Treat-Jacobson D. Methods of symptom
evaluation and their impact on peripheral artery dis-
ease (PAD) symptom prevalence: a review. Vasc Med .
2013;18:95 –
111.
4.Newman AB, Naydeck BL, Sutton-Tyrrell K, et al.
The role of comorbidity in the assessment of inter-mittent claudication in older adults. J Clin Epidemiol .
2001;54:294 –300.
5.McDermott MM, Greenland P, Liu K, et al. The ankle
brachial index is associated with leg function andphysical activity: the Walking and Leg CirculationStudy. Ann Intern Med . 2002;136:873 –883.
6.McDermott MM, Guralnik JM, Ferrucci L, et al.
Asymptomatic peripheral arterial disease is associated
with more adverse lower extremity characteristics than
intermittent claudication. Circulation . 2008;117:2484 –
2491 .
7.McDermott MM, Applegate WB, Bonds DE, et al.
Ankle brachial index values, leg symptoms, and func-tional performance among community-dwelling oldermen and women in the lifestyle interventions and in-dependence for elders study. J Am Heart Assoc .
2013;2:e000257 .
8.Lee JY, Lee SW, Lee WS, et al. Prevalence and
clinical implications of newly revealed, asymptomaticabnormal ankle-brachial index in patients with signif-icant coronary artery disease. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv .
2013;6:1303 –1313.
9.Diehm C, Allenberg JR, Pittrow D, et al. Mortality
and vascular morbidity in older adults with asymp-tomatic versus symptomatic peripheral artery disease.
Circulation . 2009;120:2053 –2061 .
10.Rose G, McCartney P, Reid DD. Self-administration
of a questionnaire on chest pain and intermittent
claudication. Br J Prev Soc Med . 1977;31:42 –48.11.McDermott MM, Mehta S, Greenland P. Exertional
leg symptoms other than intermittent claudication arecommon in peripheral arterial disease. Arch Intern Med .
1999;159:387 –392.
12.Ruger LJ, Irnich D, Abahji TN, et al. Characteristics
of chronic ischemic pain in patients with peripheralarterial disease. Pain. 2008;139:201 –208.
13.Tomczyk S, Treat-Jacobson D. Claudication symp-
tom experience in men and women: is there a differ-ence? J Vasc Nurs . 2009;27:92 –97.
14.Schorr EN, Peden-McAlpine C, Treat-Jacobson D,
et al. Characterization of the peripheral artery disease
symptom experience. Geriatr Nurs . 2015;36:293 –300.
15.Schorr EN, Treat-Jacobson D, Lindquist R.
The relationship between peripheral artery diseasesymptomatology and ischemia. Nurs Res . 2017;66:
378–387.
16.Creager MA, Matsushita K, Arya S, et al. Reducing
nontraumatic lower-extremity amputations by 20% by
2030: time to get to our feet: a policy statement fromthe American Heart Association. Circulation . 2021;143:
e875 –e891 .
17.Criqui MH, Matsushita K, Aboyans V, et al. Lower
extremity peripheral artery disease: contemporaryepidemiology, management gaps, and future di-rections: a scienti ﬁc statement from the American
Heart Association. Circulation . 2021;144:e171 –e191.
18.Aboyans V, Sevestre MA, Desormais I, et al.
[Epidemiology of lower extremity artery disease].Presse Med . 2018;47:38 –46.
19.Mills JL Sr, Conte MS, Armstrong DG, et al. The
Society for Vascular Surgery Lower Extremity Threat-ened Limb Classi ﬁcation System: risk strati ﬁcation
based on wound, ischemia, and foot infection (WIfI).J Vasc Surg . 2014;59:220 –234.e1-2 .
20.Norgren L, Hiatt WR, Dormandy JA, et al. Inter-
society consensus for the management of peripheral
arterial disease (TASC II). Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg .
2007;33(Suppl 1):S1 –S75.
21.Wubbeke LF, Kremers B, Daemen JHC, et al. Mor-
tality in octogenarians with chronic limb threateningischaemia after revascularisation or conservativetherapy alone. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg . 2021;61:350 –
351.
22.Farber A, Menard MT, Conte MS, et al. Surgery or
endovascular therapy for chronic limb-threateningischemia. N Engl J Med . 2022;387:2305 –2316 .
23.Fontaine R, Kim M, Kieny R. [Surgical treatment of
peripheral circulation disorders]. Helv Chir Acta .
1954;21:499 –533.
24.Rutherford RB, Baker JD, Ernst C, et al. Recom-
mended standards for reports dealing with lower ex-tremity ischemia: revised version. J Vasc Surg .
1997;26:517 –538.
25.Darling JD, McCallum JC, Soden PA, et al. Predic-
tive ability of the Society for Vascular Surgery Wound,Ischemia, and foot Infection (WIfI) classi ﬁcation sys-
tem following infrapopliteal endovascular in-
terventions for critical limb ischemia. J Vasc Surg .
2016;64:616 –622.
26.Cull DL, Manos G, Hartley MC, et al. An early
validation of the Society for Vascular Surgery lower
extremity threatened limb classi ﬁcation system. J Vasc
Surg. 2014;60:1535 –1541.JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2573

27.Zhan LX, Branco BC, Armstrong DG, et al. The
Society for Vascular Surgery lower extremity threat-ened limb classi ﬁcation system based on Wound,
Ischemia, and foot Infection (WIfI) correlates with riskof major amputation and time to wound healing. J Vasc
Surg. 2015;61:939 –944.
28.Beropoulis E, Stavroulakis K, Schwindt A, et al.
Validation of the Wound, Ischemia, foot Infection(WIfI) classi ﬁcation system in nondiabetic patients
treated by endovascular means for critical limbischemia. J Vasc Surg . 2016;64:95 –103.
29.Hess CN, Huang Z, Patel MR, et al. Acute limb
ischemia in peripheral artery disease. Circulation .
2019;140:556 –565.
30.Creager MA, Belkin M, Bluth EI, et al. 2012 ACCF/
AHA/ACR/SCAI/SIR/STS/SVM/SVN/SVS key data ele-ments and de ﬁnitions for peripheral atherosclerotic
vascular disease: a report of the American College ofCardiology Foundation/American Heart AssociationTask Force on Clinical Data Standards (Writing Com-mittee to Develop Clinical Data Standards for Periph-
eral Atherosclerotic Vascular Disease). J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2012;59:294 –357.
2.2. History and Physical Examination to Assess for
PAD
1.McDermott MM, Mehta S, Greenland P. Exertional
leg symptoms other than intermittent claudication are
common in peripheral arterial disease. Arch Intern Med .
1999;159:387 –392.
2.Hirsch AT, Criqui MH, Treat-Jacobson D, et al. Pe-
ripheral arterial disease detection, awareness, andtreatment in primary care. JAMA . 2001;286:1317 –1324 .
3.McDermott MM. Lower extremity manifestations of
peripheral artery disease: the pathophysiologic andfunctional implications of leg ischemia. Circ Res .
2015;116:1540 –1550 .
4.McDermott MM, Greenland P, Liu K, et al. Leg
symptoms in peripheral arterial disease: associatedclinical characteristics and functional impairment.JAMA . 2001;286:1599 –1606 .
5.Khan NA, Rahim SA, Anand SS, et al. Does the
clinical examination predict lower extremity peripheralarterial disease? JAMA . 2006;295:536 –546.
6.Criqui MH, Denenberg JO, Bird CE, et al. The cor-
relation between symptoms and non-invasive test re-
sults in patients referred for peripheral arterial diseasetesting. Vasc Med . 1996;1:65 –71.
7.Armstrong DW, Tobin C, Matangi MF. The accuracy
of the physical examination for the detection of lower
extremity peripheral arterial disease. Can J Cardiol .
2010;26:e346 –e350 .
8.Cournot M, Boccalon H, Cambou JP, et al. Accuracy
of the screening physical examination to identify
subclinical atherosclerosis and peripheral arterial dis-
ease in asymptomatic subjects. J Vasc Surg . 2007;46:
1215 –1221.
9.Criqui MH, Matsushita K, Aboyans V, et al. Lower
extremity peripheral artery disease: contemporaryepidemiology, management gaps, and future di-rections: a scienti ﬁc statement from the American
Heart Association. Circulation . 2021;144:e171 –e191.
10.Allison MA, Cushman M, Solomon C, et al. Ethnicity
and risk factors for change in the ankle-brachial index:the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis. J Vasc Surg .
2009;50:1049 –1056 .
11.Wennberg PW. Approach to the patient with pe-
ripheral arterial disease. Circulation . 2013;128:2241 –
2250 .
12.Londero LS, Lindholt JS, Thomsen MD, et al. Pulse
palpation is an effective method for population-basedscreening to exclude peripheral arterial disease. J Vasc
Surg. 2016;63:1305 –1310 .
13.Wassel CL, Loomba R, Ix JH, et al. Family history of
peripheral artery disease is associated with prevalenceand severity of peripheral artery disease: the San Diegopopulation study. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2011;58:1386 –
1392 .
14.Gerhard-Herman MD, Gornik HL, Barrett C, et al.
2016 AHA/ACC guideline on the management of pa-tients with lower extremity peripheral artery disease: a
report of the American College of Cardiology/Amer-
ican Heart Association Task Force on Clinical PracticeGuidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2017;69:e71 –e126 .
15.Norgren L, Hiatt WR, Dormandy JA, et al. Inter-
society consensus for the management of peripheralarterial disease (TASC II). Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg .
2007;33(Suppl 1):S1 –S75.
3.1. Resting ABI and Additional Physiological Testing
1.Lijmer JG, Hunink MG, van den Dungen JJ, et al. ROC
analysis of noninvasive tests for peripheral arterialdisease. Ultrasound Med Biol . 1996;22:391 –398.
2.Xu D, Zou L, Xing Y, et al. Diagnostic value of ankle-
brachial index in peripheral arterial disease: a meta-analysis. Can J Cardiol . 2013;29:492 –498.
3.
Aboyans V, Criqui MH, Abraham P, et al. Measure-
ment and interpretation of the ankle-brachial index: ascienti ﬁc statement from the American Heart Associ-
ation. Circulation . 2012;126:2890 –2909 .
4.McDermott MM, Greenland P, Liu K, et al. Leg
symptoms in peripheral arterial disease: associatedclinical characteristics and functional impairment.JAMA . 2001;286:1599 –1606 .
5.Hirsch AT, Criqui MH, Treat-Jacobson D, et al.
Peripheral arterial disease detection, awareness, andtreatment in primary care. JAMA . 2001;286:1317 –
1324 .
6.U.S. Preventive Services Task Force; Curry SJ,
Krist AH, et al. Risk assessment for cardiovascular
disease with nontraditional risk factors: US PreventiveServices Task Force recommendation statement.JAMA . 2018;320:272 –280.
7.Alahdab F, Wang AT, Elraiyah TA, et al. A systematic
review for the screening for peripheral arterial diseasein asymptomatic patients. J Vasc Surg . 2015;61:42S –
53S.
8.Bundo M, Munoz L, Perez C, et al. Asymptomatic
peripheral arterial disease in type 2 diabetes patients: a
10-year follow-up study of the utility of the anklebrachial index as a prognostic marker of cardiovasculardisease. Ann Vasc Surg . 2010;24:985 –993.
9.Bouisset F, Bongard V, Ruidavets JB, et al. Prog-
nostic usefulness of clinical and subclinical peripheralarterial disease in men with stable coronary heartdisease. Am J Cardiol . 2012;110:197 –202.
10.Selvin E, Erlinger TP. Prevalence of and risk factors
for peripheral arterial disease in the United States:
results from the National Health and NutritionExamination Survey, 1999-2000. Circulation .
2004;110:738 –743.
11.Criqui MH, Vargas V, Denenberg JO, et al. Ethnicity
and peripheral arterial disease: the San Diego Popu-
lation Study. Circulation . 2005;112:2703 –2707 .
12.Carter SA, Lezack JD. Digital systolic pressures in
the lower limb in arterial disease. Circulation . 1971;43:
905 –914.
13.Ramsey DE, Manke DA, Sumner DS. Toe blood
pressure. A valuable adjunct to ankle pressure mea-surement for assessing peripheral arterial disease.J Cardiovasc Surg (Torino) . 1983;24:43 –48.
14.Vincent DG, Salles-Cunha SX, Bernhard VM, et al.
Noninvasive assessment of toe systolic pressures with
special reference to diabetes mellitus. J Cardiovasc
Surg (Torino) . 1983;24:22
–28.
15.Aboyans V, Ho E, Denenberg JO, et al. The as-
sociation between elevated ankle systolic pressures
and peripheral occlusive arterial disease in diabetic
and nondiabetic subjects. J Vasc Surg . 2008;48:
1197 –1203 .
16.Weinberg I, Giri J, Calfon MA, et al. Anatomic
correlates of supra-normal ankle brachial indices.
Catheter Cardiovasc Interv . 2013;81:1025 –1030 .
17.Hoyer C, Sandermann J, Petersen LJ. The toe-
brachial index in the diagnosis of peripheral arterialdisease. J Vasc Surg . 2013;58:231 –238.
18.Aday AW, Kinlay S, Gerhard-Herman MD. Com-
parison of different exercise ankle pressure indices inthe diagnosis of peripheral artery disease. Vasc Med .
2018;23:541 –548.
19.Laing SP, Greenhalgh RM. Standard exercise test to
assess peripheral arterial disease. Br Med J . 1980;280:
13–16.
20.Regensteiner JG, Steiner JF, Hiatt WR. Exercise
training improves functional status in patients withperipheral arterial disease. J Vasc Surg . 1996;23:104 –
115.
21.Hiatt WR, Rogers RK, Brass EP. The treadmill is a
better functional test than the 6-minute walk test intherapeutic trials of patients with peripheral arterydisease. Circulation . 2014;130:69 –78.
22.Hiatt WR, Hirsch AT, Regensteiner JG, et al.
Vascular Clinical Trialists. Clinical trials for claudica-tion. Assessment of exercise performance, functionalstatus, and clinical end points. Circulation . 1995;92:
614–621.
23.Hiatt WR, Wolfel EE, Meier RH, et al. Superiority of
treadmill walking exercise versus strength training forpatients with peripheral arterial disease. Implicationsfor the mechanism of the training response. Circula-
tion. 1994;90:1866 –1874 .
24.Hiatt WR, Regensteiner JG, Hargarten ME, et al.
Beneﬁt of exercise conditioning for patients with pe-
ripheral arterial disease. Circulation . 1990;81:602 –
609.
25.Murphy TP, Reynolds MR, Cohen DJ, et al. Corre-
lation of patient-reported symptom outcomes and
treadmill test outcomes after treatment for aortoiliacclaudication. J Vasc Interv Radiol . 2013;24:1427 –1435.
quiz 1436 .
26.Ro du H, Moon HJ, Kim JH, et al. Photo-
plethysmography and continuous-wave Doppler ul-
trasound as a complementary test to ankle-brachialGornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042574

index in detection of stenotic peripheral arterial dis-
ease. Angiology . 2013;64:314 –320.
27.Rutherford RB, Lowenstein DH, Klein MF.
Combining segmental systolic pressures and plethys-mography to diagnose arterial occlusive disease of thelegs. Am J Surg . 1979;138:211 –218.
28.Bunte MC, Jacob J, Nudelman B, et al. Validation
of the relationship between ankle-brachial and toe-
brachial indices and infragenicular arterial patency incritical limb ischemia. Vasc Med . 2015;20:23 –29.
29.Sukul D, Grey SF, Henke PK, et al. Heterogeneity of
ankle-brachial indices in patients undergoing revas-cularization for critical limb ischemia. J Am Coll Cardiol
Intv. 2017;10:2307 –2316 .
30.Shishehbor MH, Hammad TA, Zeller T, et al. An
analysis of IN.PACT DEEP randomized trial on thelimitations of the societal guidelines-recommended
hemodynamic parameters to diagnose critical limb
ischemia. J Vasc Surg . 2016;63:1311 –1317.
31.Mills JL Sr, Conte MS, Armstrong DG, et al. The
Society for Vascular Surgery Lower Extremity Threat-ened Limb Classi ﬁcation System: risk strati ﬁcation
based on wound, ischemia, and foot infection (WIfI).J Vasc Surg . 2014;59:220 –234.e1-2 .
32.Salaun P, Desormais I, Lapebie FX, et al. Compar-
ison of ankle pressure, systolic toe pressure, andtranscutaneous oxygen pressure to predict major
amputation after 1 year in the COPART cohort. Angi-
ology . 2019;70:229 –236.
33.Carter SA, Tate RB. Value of toe pulse waves in
addition to systolic pressures in the assessment of theseverity of peripheral arterial disease and critical limbischemia. J Vasc Surg . 1996;24:258 –265.
34.Yamada T, Ohta T, Ishibashi H, et al. Clinical reli-
ability and utility of skin perfusion pressure measure-ment in ischemic limbs —comparison with other
noninvasive diagnostic methods. J Vasc Surg . 2008;47:
318–323.
35.Biotteau E, Mahe G, Rousseau P, et al. Trans-
cutaneous oxygen pressure measurements in diabeticand non-diabetic patients clinically suspected of se-vere limb ischemia: a matched paired retrospectiveanalysis. Int Angiol . 2009;28:479 –483.
36.Castronuovo JJ Jr, Adera HM, Smiell JM, et al. Skin
perfusion pressure measurement is valuable in thediagnosis of critical limb ischemia. J Vasc Surg .
1997;26:629 –637
.
37.Ballard JL, Eke CC, Bunt TJ, et al. A prospective
evaluation of transcutaneous oxygen measurements in
the management of diabetic foot problems. J Vasc
Surg. 1995;22:485 –490; discussion 490-492 .
38.Carter SA. Clinical measurement of systolic pres-
sures in limbs with arterial occlusive disease. JAMA .
1969;207:1869 –1874 .
39.Ix JH, Katz R, De Boer IH, et al. Association of
chronic kidney disease with the spectrum of anklebrachial index the CHS (Cardiovascular Health Study).
J Am Coll Cardiol . 2009;54:1176 –1184 .
40.AbuRahma AF, Adams E, AbuRahma J, et al. Crit-
ical analysis and limitations of resting ankle-brachial
index in the diagnosis of symptomatic peripheralarterial disease patients and the role of diabetes mel-litus and chronic kidney disease. J Vasc Surg . 2020;71:
937–945.41.Aboyans V, Ricco JB, Bartelink MEL, et al. 2017 ESC
guidelines on the diagnosis and treatment of periph-eral arterial diseases, in collaboration with the Euro-pean Society for Vascular Surgery (ESVS): document
covering atherosclerotic disease of extracranial carotid
and vertebral, mesenteric, renal, upper and lower ex-tremity arteries. Eur Heart J . 2018;39:763 –816.
42.Williams DT, Harding KG, Price P. An evaluation of
the ef ﬁcacy of methods used in screening for lower-
limb arterial disease in diabetes. Diabetes Care .
2005;28:2206 –2210 .
43.Tehan PE, Bray A, Chuter VH. Non-invasive
vascular assessment in the foot with diabetes: sensi-tivity and speci ﬁcity of the ankle brachial index, toe
brachial index and continuous wave Doppler for
detecting peripheral arterial disease. J Diabetes Com-
plications . 2016;30:155 –160.
44.Diehm C, Allenberg JR, Pittrow D, et al. Mortality
and vascular morbidity in older adults with asymp-tomatic versus symptomatic peripheral artery disease.Circulation . 2009;120:2053 –2061 .
45.Ankle Brachial Index Collaboration, Fowkes FG,
Murray GD, et al. Ankle brachial index combined withFramingham Risk Score to predict cardiovascularevents and mortality: a meta-analysis. JAMA .
2008;300:197 –208.
46.Ratanakorn D, Keandoungchun J, Tegeler CH.
Prevalence and association between risk factors,stroke subtypes, and abnormal ankle brachial index inacute ischemic stroke. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis .
2012;21:498 –503.
47.Sen S, Lynch DR Jr, Kaltsas E, et al. Association of
asymptomatic peripheral arterial disease with vascular
events in patients with stroke or transient ischemicattack. Stroke . 2009;40:3472 –3477 .
48.Hiramoto JS, Katz R, Ix JH, et al. Sex differences in
the prevalence and clinical outcomes of subclinical
peripheral artery disease in the Health, Aging, and
Body Composition (Health ABC) study. Vascular .
2014;22:142 –148.
49.Jimenez M, Dorado L, Hernandez-Perez M, et al.
Ankle-brachial index in screening for asymptomatic
carotid and intracranial atherosclerosis. Atheroscle-
rosis. 2014;233:72 –75.
50.Tsivgoulis G, Bogiatzi C, Heliopoulos I, et al. Low
ankle-brachial index predicts early risk of recurrentstroke in patients with acute cerebral ischemia.Atherosclerosis . 2012;220:407 –412.
51.Lin JS, Olson CM, Johnson ES, et al. The ankle-
brachial index for peripheral artery disease screeningand cardiovascular disease prediction among asymp-tomatic adults: a systematic evidence review for theU.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med .
2013;159:333 –341.
52.Lindholt JS, Sogaard R. Population screening and
intervention for vascular disease in Danish men (VIVA):a randomised controlled trial. Lancet . 2017;390:2256 –
2265 .
53.Lindholt JS, Sogaard R, Rasmussen LM, et al. Five-
year outcomes of the Danish Cardiovascular Screening(DANCAVAS) Trial. N Engl J Med . 2022;387:1385 –1394 .
54.McDermott MM, Liu K, Guralnik JM, et al. Home-
based walking exercise intervention in peripheralartery disease: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA .
2013;310:57 –65.
55.McDermott MM, Fried L, Simonsick E, et al.
Asymptomatic peripheral arterial disease is indepen-dently associated with impaired lower extremityfunctioning: the Women ’s Health and Aging study.
Circulation . 2000;101:1007 –1012 .
56.McDermott MM, Applegate WB, Bonds DE, et al.
Ankle brachial index values, leg symptoms, and func-
tional performance among community-dwelling older
men and women in the lifestyle interventions and in-dependence for elders study. J Am Heart Assoc .
2013;2:e000257 .
57.McDermott MM, Liu K, Greenland P, et al. Func-
tional decline in peripheral arterial disease: associa-tions with the ankle brachial index and leg symptoms.JAMA . 2004;292:453 –461.
58.McDermott MM, Ferrucci L, Liu K, et al. Leg
symptom categories and rates of mobility decline inperipheral arterial disease. J Am Geriatr Soc . 2010;58:
1256
–1262 .
59.McDermott MM, Guralnik JM, Criqui MH, et al.
Home-based walking exercise in peripheral artery
disease: 12-month follow-up of the GOALS randomized
trial. J Am Heart Assoc . 2014;3:e000711 .
60.McDermott MM, Liu K, Ferrucci L, et al. Physical
performance in peripheral arterial disease: a slowerrate of decline in patients who walk more. Ann Intern
Med. 2006;144:10 –20.
61.Randhawa MS, Reed GW, Grafmiller K, et al.
Prevalence of tibial artery and pedal arch patency byangiography in patients with critical limb ischemia andnoncompressible ankle brachial index. Circ Cardiovasc
Interv . 2017;10:e004605 .
62.Kim ES, Sharma AM, Scissons R, et al. Interpreta-
tion of peripheral arterial and venous Doppler wave-
forms: a consensus statement from the Society for
Vascular Medicine and Society for Vascular Ultrasound.Vasc Med . 2020;25:484 –506.
63.Misra S, Shishehbor MH, Takahashi EA, et al.
Perfusion assessment in critical limb ischemia: princi-ples for understanding and the development of evi-dence and evaluation of devices: a scienti ﬁc statement
from the American Heart Association. Circulation .
2019;140:e657 –e672 .
64.Patry J, Laurencelle L, Belisle J, et al. Vascular
assessment in patients with a lower limb wound: acorrelational study of photoplethysmography and
laser Doppler ﬂowmetry toe pressure techniques.
J Diabetes Sci Technol . 2020:1932296820979973 .
65.Teso D, Sommerset J, Dally M, et al. Pedal accel-
eration time (PAT): a novel predictor of limb salvage.Ann Vasc Surg . 2021;75:189 –193.
66.Sommerset J, Karmy-Jones R, Dally M, et al.
Plantar acceleration time: a novel technique to eval-uate arterial ﬂow to the foot. Ann Vasc Surg . 2019;60:
308 –314.
67.Lee S, Mey L, Szymanska AF, et al. SFDI biomarkers
provide a quantitative ulcer risk metric and can be usedto predict diabetic foot ulcer onset. J Diabetes Com-
plications . 2020;34:107624 .
68.Weinkauf C, Mazhar A, Vaishnav K, et al. Near-
instant noninvasive optical imaging of tissue perfusionJACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2575

for vascular assessment. J Vasc Surg . 2019;69:555 –
562.
69.Gerhard-Herman MD, Gornik HL, Barrett C, et al.
2016 AHA/ACC guideline on the management of pa-tients with lower extremity peripheral artery disease: areport of the American College of Cardiology/Amer-ican Heart Association Task Force on Clinical PracticeGuidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2017;69:e71 –e126 .
3.2. Imaging for PAD
1.Burbelko M, Augsten M, Kalinowski MO, et al.
Comparison of contrast-enhanced multi-station MRangiography and digital subtraction angiography of
the lower extremity arterial disease. J Magn Reson
Imaging . 2013;37:1427 –1435 .
2.Met R, Bipat S, Legemate DA, et al. Diagnostic
performance of computed tomography angiography in
peripheral arterial disease: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. JAMA . 2009;301:415 –424.
3.Menke J, Larsen J. Meta-analysis: accuracy of
contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance angiography
for assessing steno-occlusions in peripheral arterial
disease. Ann Intern Med . 2010;153:325 –334.
4.de Vries SO, Hunink MG, Polak JF. Summary receiver
operating characteristic curves as a technique formeta-analysis of the diagnostic performance of duplex
ultrasonography in peripheral arterial disease. Acad
Radiol . 1996;3:361 –369.
5.Mestre XM, Castellote MA, Coll RV, et al. Arterial
mapping with Duplex ultrasound: diagnostic-
therapeutic strategy in patients with critical lower-
limb ischemia. Int Angiol . 2009;28:209 –214.
6.Martinelli O, Alunno A, Drudi FM, et al. Duplex ul-
trasound versus CT angiography for the treatment
planning of lower-limb arterial disease. J Ultrasound .
2021;24:471 –479.
7.Andreucci M, Solomon R, Tasanarong A. Side effects
of radiographic contrast media: pathogenesis, riskfactors, and prevention. Biomed Res Int . 2014;2014:
741018 .
8.Stacul F, van der Molen AJ, Reimer P, et al. Contrast
induced nephropathy: updated ESUR Contrast MediaSafety Committee guidelines. Eur Radiol . 2011;21:
2527 –2541 .
9.McCullough PA, Capasso P. Patient discomfort
associated with the use of intra-arterial iodinatedcontrast media: a meta-analysis of comparative ran-
domized controlled trials. BMC Med Imaging . 2011;11:12 .
10.Woolen SA, Shankar PR, Gagnier JJ, et al. Risk of
nephrogenic systemic
ﬁbrosis in patients with stage 4
or 5 chronic kidney disease receiving a group IIgadolinium-based contrast agent: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. JAMA Intern Med . 2020;180:223 –
230.
11.Zhang B, Liang L, Chen W, et al. An updated study
to determine association between gadolinium-based
contrast agents and nephrogenic systemic ﬁbrosis.
PLoS One . 2015;10:e0129720 .
12.American College of Radiology. ACR Manual on
Contrast Media. 2022. Accessed January 5, 2023. https://
www.acr.org/-/media/acr/ ﬁles/clinical-resources/
contrast_media.pdf
13.Cavallo AU, Koktzoglou I, Edelman RR, et al.
Noncontrast Magnetic Resonance Angiography for theDiagnosis of Peripheral Vascular Disease. Circ Car-
diovasc Imaging . 2019;12:e008844 .
4.1. Ampli ﬁers of Cardiovascular and Limb-Related
Risks in Patients with PAD
1.Elhadd T, Robb R, Jung R, et al. Pilot study of
prevalence of asymptomatic peripheral arterial occlu-sive disease in patients with diabetes attending ahospital clinic. Practical Diabetes Int . 1999;16:163 –166.
2.Lange S, Diehm C, Darius H, et al. High prevalence of
peripheral arterial disease but low antiplatelet treat-
ment rates in elderly primary care patients with dia-betes. Diabetes Care . 2003;26:3357 –3358 .
3.Escobar C, Blanes I, Ruiz A, et al. Prevalence and
clinical pro ﬁle and management of peripheral arterial
disease in elderly patients with diabetes. Eur J Intern
Med. 2011;22:275 –281.
4.Mohammedi K, Woodward M, Hirakawa Y, et al.
Presentations of major peripheral arterial disease andrisk of major outcomes in patients with type 2 dia-betes: results from the ADVANCE-ON study. Car-
diovasc Diabetol . 2016;15:129 .
5.Shammas AN, Jeon-Slaughter H, Tsai S, et al. Major
limb outcomes following lower extremity endovas-cular revascularization in patients with and withoutdiabetes mellitus. J Endovasc Ther . 2017;24:376 –382.
6.Sen P, Demirdal T, Emir B. Meta-analysis of risk
factors for amputation in diabetic foot infections.Diabetes Metab Res Rev . 2019;35:e3165 .
7.Duval S, Long KH, Roy SS, et al. The contribution of
tobacco use to high health care utilization and medical
costs in peripheral artery disease: a state-based cohort
analysis. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2015;66:1566 –1574 .
8.Hirsch AT, Treat-Jacobson D, Lando HA, et al. The
role of tobacco cessation, antiplatelet and lipid-lowering therapies in the treatment of peripheralarterial disease. Vasc Med
. 1997;2:243 –251.
9.Brar A, Stefanov DG, Jindal RM, et al. Mortality on
the kidney waiting list and after transplantation inpatients with peripheral arterial disease: an analysis ofthe United States Renal Data System. Transplant Proc .
2016;48:15 –20.
10.O’Hare AM, Glidden DV, Fox CS, et al. High prev-
alence of peripheral arterial disease in persons withrenal insuf ﬁciency: results from the National Health
and Nutrition Examination Survey 1999-2000. Circu-
lation . 2004;109:320 –323.
11.Lash JP, Go AS, Appel LJ, et al. Chronic Renal
Insufﬁciency Cohort (CRIC) Study: baseline character-
istics and associations with kidney function. Clin J Am
Soc Nephrol . 2009;4:1302 –1311.
12.Selvin E, Erlinger TP. Prevalence of and risk factors
for peripheral arterial disease in the United States:
results from the National Health and Nutrition Exam-ination Survey, 1999-2000. Circulation . 2004;110:
738–743.
13.Saran R, Robinson B, Abbott KC, et al. US Renal
Data System 2018 annual data report: epidemiology of
kidney disease in the United States. Am J Kidney Dis .
2019;73:A7 –A8.
14.Luders F, Bunzemeier H, Engelbertz C, et al. CKD
and acute and long-term outcome of patients withperipheral artery disease and critical limb ischemia.
Clin J Am Soc Nephrol . 2016;11:216 –222.
15.Hopley CW, Kavanagh S, Patel MR, et al. Chronic
kidney disease and risk for cardiovascular and limboutcomes in patients with symptomatic peripheral ar-tery disease: the EUCLID trial. Vasc Med . 2019;24:422 –
430.
16.Bourrier M, Ferguson TW, Embil JM, et al. Periph-
eral artery disease: its adverse consequences with andwithout CKD. Am J Kidney Dis . 2020;75:705 –712.
17.Behroozian A, Beckman JA. Microvascular disease
increases amputation in patients with peripheral arterydisease. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol . 2020;40:534 –
540.
18.Olesen KKW, Anand S, Thim T, et al. Microvascular
disease increases the risk of lower limb amputation - aWestern Danish cohort study. Eur J Clin Invest .
2022;52:e13812 .
19.Beckman JA, Duncan MS, Damrauer SM, et al.
Microvascular disease, peripheral artery disease, and
amputation. Circulation . 2019;140:449 –458.
20.Tsao CW, Aday AW, Almarzooq ZI, et al. Heart
disease and stroke statistics-2022 update: a reportfrom the American Heart Association. Circulation .
2022;145:e153 –e639 .
21.Bhatt DL, Steg PG, Ohman EM, et al. International
prevalence, recognition, and treatment of cardiovas-cular risk factors in outpatients with atherothrombosis.JAMA . 2006;295:180 –189.
22.Bhatt DL, Peterson ED, Harrington RA, et al. Prior
polyvascular disease: risk factor for adverse ischaemicoutcomes in acute coronary syndromes. Eur Heart J .
2009;30:1195 –1202 .
23.Gutierrez JA, Mulder H, Jones WS, et al. Poly-
vascular disease and risk of major adverse cardiovas-cular events in peripheral artery disease: a secondaryanalysis of the EUCLID trial. JAMA Netw Open . 2018;1:
e185239 .
24.Chen DC, Singh GD, Armstrong EJ, et al. Long-
term comparative outcomes of patients with periph-eral artery disease with and without concomitantcoronary artery disease. Am J Cardiol . 2017;119:1146 –
1152.
25.Olivier CB, Mulder H, Hiatt WR, et al. Incidence,
characteristics, and outcomes of myocardial infarctionin patients with peripheral artery disease: insights fromthe EUCLID trial. JAMA Cardiol . 2019;4:7 –15.
26.Serena J, Segura T, Roquer J, et al. The ARTICO
study: identi ﬁcation of patients at high risk of vascular
recurrence after a ﬁrst non-cardioembolic stroke. BMC
Neurol . 2015;15:28 .
27.Bonaca MP, Gutierrez JA, Cannon C, et al. Poly-
vascular disease, type 2 diabetes, and long-termvascular risk: a secondary analysis of the IMPROVE-ITtrial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol . 2018;6:934 –943.
28.Li MF, Zhao CC, Li TT, et al. The coexistence of
carotid and lower extremity atherosclerosis furtherincreases cardio-cerebrovascular risk in type 2 dia-betes. Cardiovasc Diabetol . 2016;15:43 .
29.Gutierrez JA, Scirica BM, Bonaca MP, et al. Preva-
lence and outcomes of polyvascular (coronary, pe-ripheral, or cerebrovascular) disease in patients withGornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042576

diabetes mellitus (from the SAVOR-TIMI 53 trial). Am J
Cardiol . 2019;123:145 –152.
30.Anand SS, Bosch J, Eikelboom JW, et al. Rivarox-
aban with or without aspirin in patients with stableperipheral or carotid artery disease: an international,randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.
Lancet . 2018;391:219 –229.
31.Bauersachs RM, Szarek M, Brodmann M, et al. Total
ischemic event reduction with rivaroxaban after pe-ripheral arterial revascularization in the VOYAGER PADtrial. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2021;78:317 –326.
32.Low Wang CC, Blomster JI, Heizer G, et al. Car-
diovascular and limb outcomes in patients with dia-betes and peripheral artery disease: the EUCLID trial.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2018;72:3274 –3284 .
33.Collins AJ, Foley RN, Chavers B, et al. United States
Renal Data System 2011 Annual Data Report: atlas of
chronic kidney disease & end-stage renal disease in the
United States. Am J Kidney Dis . 2012;59(A7):e1 –e420 .
34.Rajagopalan S, Dellegrottaglie S, Furniss AL, et al.
Peripheral arterial disease in patients with end-stagerenal disease: observations from the Dialysis Out-comes and Practice Patterns Study (DOPPS). Circula-
tion. 2006;114:1914 –1922 .
35.McDermott MM, Guralnik JM, Tian L, et al. Inci-
dence and prognostic signi ﬁcance of depressive
symptoms in peripheral artery disease. J Am Heart
Assoc . 2016;5:e002959 .
36.Arya S, Lee S, Zahner GJ, et al. The association of
comorbid depression with mortality and amputation inveterans with peripheral artery disease. J Vasc Surg .
2018;68:536 –545.e2 .
37.Cherr GS, Wang J, Zimmerman PM, et al. Depres-
sion is associated with worse patency and recurrent legsymptoms after lower extremity revascularization.J Vasc Surg . 2007;45:744 –750.
38.Kuruppu S, Ghani M, Pritchard M, et al.
A prospective investigation of depression and adverse
outcomes in patients undergoing vascular surgical in-
terventions: a retrospective cohort study using a largemental health database in South London. Eur Psychi-
atry. 2021;64:e13 .
39.Thomas M, Patel KK, Gosch K, et al. Mental health
concerns in patients with symptomatic peripheral ar-tery disease: insights from the PORTRAIT registry.J Psychosom Res . 2020;131:109963 .
40.Smolderen KG, Hoeks SE, Pedersen SS, et al.
Lower-leg symptoms in peripheral arterial disease are
associated with anxiety, depression, and anhedonia.
Vasc Med . 2009;14:297 –304.
41.Lyness JM, Noel TK, Cox C, et al. Screening for
depression in elderly primary care patients. A com-
parison of the Center for Epidemiologic Studies-Depression Scale and the Geriatric Depression Scale.Arch Intern Med . 1997;157:449 –454.
42.Spitzer RL, Kroenke K, Williams JB. Validation and
utility of a self-report version of PRIME-MD: the PHQ
primary care study. Primary Care Evaluation of Mental
Disorders. Patient Health Questionnaire. JAMA .
1999;282:1737 –1744 .
43.Allison MA, Armstrong DG, Goodney PP, et al.
Health disparities in peripheral artery disease: a sci-entiﬁc statement from the American Heart Association.
Circulation . 2023;148:286 –296.44.Hirsch AT, Criqui MH, Treat-Jacobson D, et al.
Peripheral arterial disease detection, awareness, andtreatment in primary care. JAMA . 2001;286:1317 –1324 .
45.Willigendael EM, Teijink JA, Bartelink ML, et al.
Inﬂuence of smoking on incidence and prevalence of
peripheral arterial disease. J Vasc Surg . 2004;40:1158 –
1165 .
46.Elbadawi A, Elgendy IY, Megaly M, et al. Temporal
trends and outcomes of critical limb ischemia amongpatients with chronic kidney disease. Vasc Med .
2021;26:155 –163.
47.Arhuidese I, Nejim B, Locham S, et al. Infrainguinal
bypass surgery outcomes are worse in hemodialysispatients compared with patients with renal trans-plants. J Vasc Surg . 2019;69:850 –856.
48.Smilowitz NR, Bhandari N, Berger JS. Chronic
kidney disease and outcomes of lower extremity
revascularization for peripheral artery disease.
Atherosclerosis . 2020;297:149 –156.
49.Nejim B, Hicks CW, Arhuidese I, et al. Outcomes of
infrainguinal lower extremity bypass are superior inkidney transplant recipients than patients with dialysis.Ann Vasc Surg . 2020;63:209 –217.
4.2. Health Disparities in PAD
1.Lefebvre KM, Chevan J. The persistence of gender
and racial disparities in vascular lower extremity
amputation: an examination of HCUP-NIS data (2002-
2011). Vasc Med . 2015;20:51 –59.
2.Allison MA, Armstrong DG, Goodney PP, et al.
Health disparities in peripheral artery disease: a sci-entiﬁc statement from the American Heart Association.
Circulation . 2023;148:286 –296.
3.Minc SD, Hendricks B, Misra R, et al. Geographic
variation in amputation rates among patients with
diabetes and/or peripheral arterial disease in the rural
state of West Virginia identi ﬁes areas for improved
care. J Vasc Surg . 2020;71:1708 –1717.e5 .
4.Hurst JE, Tehan PE, Hussey K, et al. Association of
peripheral artery disease and chronic limb-threateningischemia with socioeconomic deprivation in peoplewith diabetes: a population data-linkage and geo-spatial analysis. Vasc Med . 2021;26:147 –154.
5.Arya S, Binney Z, Khakharia A, et al. Race and so-
cioeconomic status independently affect risk of majoramputation in peripheral artery disease. J Am Heart
Assoc . 2018;7:e007425 .
6.Barnes JA, Eid MA, Creager MA, et al. Epidemiology
and risk of amputation in patients with diabetes mel-
litus and peripheral artery disease. Arterioscler Thromb
Vasc Biol . 2020;40:1808 –1817.
7.Mustapha JA, Fisher BT Sr, Rizzo JA, et al. Explain-
ing racial disparities in amputation rates for thetreatment of peripheral artery disease (PAD) usingdecomposition methods. J Racial Ethn Health Dispar-
ities. 2017;4:784 –795.
8.Carnethon MR, Pu J, Howard G, et al. Cardiovascular
health in African Americans: a scienti ﬁc statement
from the American Heart Association. Circulation .
2017;136:e393 –e423 .
9.Holman KH, Henke PK, Dimick JB, et al. Racial dis-
parities in the use of revascularization before legamputation in Medicare patients. J Vasc Surg . 2011;54:
420 –426, 426.e1 .10.McDermott MM, Polonsky TS, Kibbe MR, et al.
Racial differences in functional decline in peripheralartery disease and associations with socioeconomicstatus and education. J Vasc Surg .2 0 1 7 ; 6 6 : 8 2 6 –
834.
11.Fanaroff AC, Yang L, Nathan AS, et al. Geographic
and socioeconomic disparities in major lower extremity
amputation rates in metropolitan areas. J Am Heart
Assoc . 2021;10:e021456 .
12.Selvin E, Erlinger TP. Prevalence of and risk factors
for peripheral arterial disease in the United States:results from the National Health and Nutrition Exam-ination Survey, 1999-2000. Circulation . 2004;110:
738–743.
13.Hackler EL 3rd, Hamburg NM, White Solaru KT.
Racial and ethnic disparities in peripheral artery dis-
ease. Circ Res . 2021;128:1913 –1926 .
14.
Geronimus AT, Hicken M, Keene D, et al. "Weath-
ering" and age patterns of allostatic load scores amongblacks and whites in the United States. Am J Public
Health . 2006;96:826 –833.
15.Churchwell K, Elkind MSV, Benjamin RM, et al. Call
to action: structural racism as a fundamental driver ofhealth disparities: a presidential advisory from theAmerican Heart Association. Circulation . 2020;142:
e454 –e468 .
16.Williams DR. Race, socioeconomic status, and
health. The added effects of racism and discrimination.
Ann N Y Acad Sci . 1999;896:173 –188.
17.Creager MA, Matsushita K, Arya S, et al. Reducing
nontraumatic lower-extremity amputations by 20% by2030: time to get to our feet: a policy statement fromthe American Heart Association. Circulation . 2021;143:
e875 –e891 .
18.Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. About
underlying cause of death, 1999 –2020. Accessed
February 15, 2023. https://wonder.cdc.gov/ucd-icd10.
html
19.Grines CL, Klein AJ, Bauser-Heaton H, et al. Racial
and ethnic disparities in coronary, vascular, structural,and congenital heart disease. Catheter Cardiovasc
Interv . 2021;98:277 –294.
4.2.1. Race and Ethnicity
1.Hackler EL 3rd, Hamburg NM, White Solaru KT.
Racial and ethnic disparities in peripheral artery dis-
ease. Circ Res . 2021;128:1913 –1926 .
2.Allison MA, Armstrong DG, Goodney PP, et al.
Health disparities in peripheral artery disease: a sci-
entiﬁc statement from the American Heart Association.
Circulation . 2023;148:286 –296.
3.Matsushita K, Sang Y, Ning H, et al. Lifetime risk of
lower-extremity peripheral artery disease de ﬁned by
ankle-brachial index in the United States. J Am Heart
Assoc . 2019;8:e012177 .
4.Criqui MH, Matsushita K, Aboyans V, et al. Lower
extremity peripheral artery disease: contemporary
epidemiology, management gaps, and future di-
rections: a scienti ﬁc statement from the American
Heart Association. Circulation . 2021;144:e171 –e191.
5.Allison MA, Cushman M, Solomon C, et al. Ethnicity
and risk factors for change in the ankle-brachial index:the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis. J Vasc Surg .
2009;50:1049
–1056 .JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2577

6.Demsas F, Joiner MM, Telma K, et al. Disparities in
peripheral artery disease care: a review and call foraction. Semin Vasc Surg . 2022;35:141 –154.
7.Arya S, Binney Z, Khakharia A, et al. Race and so-
cioeconomic status independently affect risk of majoramputation in peripheral artery disease. J Am Heart
Assoc . 2018;7:e007425 .
8.Krawisz AK, Natesan S, Wadhera RK, et al. Differ-
ences in comorbidities explain black-white disparitiesin outcomes after femoropopliteal endovascularintervention. Circulation . 2022;146:191 –200.
9.Soden PA, Zettervall SL, Deery SE, et al. Black pa-
tients present with more severe vascular disease and a
greater burden of risk factors than white patients attime of major vascular intervention. J Vasc Surg .
2018;67:549 –556.e3 .
10.Gober L, Bui A, Ruddy JM. Racial and gender
disparity in achieving optimal medical therapy for in-
patients with peripheral artery disease. Ann Vasc Med
Res. 2020;7:1115 .
11.Meadows TA, Bhatt DL, Hirsch AT, et al. Ethnic
differences in the prevalence and treatment of car-
diovascular risk factors in US outpatients with pe-
ripheral arterial disease: insights from the reduction ofatherothrombosis for continued health (REACH) reg-istry. Am Heart J . 2009;158:1038 –1045 .
12.Divakaran S, Carroll BJ, Chen S, et al. Supervised
exercise therapy for symptomatic peripheral artery
disease among Medicare bene ﬁciaries between 2017
and 2018: participation rates and outcomes. Circ Car-
diovasc Qual Outcomes . 2021;14:e007953 .
13.Rucker-Whitaker C, Greenland P, Liu K, et al. Pe-
ripheral arterial disease in African Americans: clinicalcharacteristics, leg symptoms, and lower extremityfunctioning. J Am Geriatr Soc . 2004;52:922 –930.
14.McDermott MM, Polonsky TS, Kibbe MR, et al.
Racial differences in functional decline in peripheral
artery disease and associations with socioeconomicstatus and education. J Vasc Surg . 2017;66:826 –834.
15.Barnes JA, Eid MA, Creager MA, et al. Epidemiology
and risk of amputation in patients with diabetes mel-
litus and peripheral artery disease. Arterioscler Thromb
Vasc Biol . 2020;40:1808 –1817.
16.Mustapha JA, Fisher BT Sr, Rizzo JA, et al.
Explaining racial disparities in amputation rates for thetreatment of peripheral artery disease (PAD) using
decomposition methods. J Racial Ethn Health Dispar-
ities. 2017;4:784 –795.
17.Carnethon MR, Pu J, Howard G, et al. Cardiovas-
cular health in African Americans: a scienti ﬁc state-
ment from the American Heart Association. Circulation .
2017;136:e393 –e423 .
18.Lefebvre KM, Lavery LA. Disparities in amputations
in minorities. Clin Orthop Relat Res . 2011;469:1941 –
1950 .
19.Goodney PP, Dzebisashvili N, Goodman DC,
Bronner KK. Variation in the Care of Surgical Conditions:
Diabetes and Peripheral Arterial Disease: A DartmouthAtlas of Health Care Series . The Dartmouth Institute for
Health Policy and Clinical Practice; 2014 .
20.Grines CL, Klein AJ, Bauser-Heaton H, et al. Racial
and ethnic disparities in coronary, vascular, structural,and congenital heart disease. Catheter Cardiovasc
Interv . 2021;98:277 –294.
21.Dillingham TR, Pezzin LE, MacKenzie EJ. Limb
amputation and limb de ﬁciency: epidemiology andrecent trends in the United States. South Med J .
2002;95:875 –883.
22.Hirsch AT, Allison MA, Gomes AS, et al. A call to
action: women and peripheral artery disease: a scien-tiﬁc statement from the American Heart Association.
Circulation . 2012;125:1449 –1472 .
23.Durazzo TS, Frencher S, Gusberg R. In ﬂuence of
race on the management of lower extremity ischemia:
revascularization vs amputation. JAMA Surg . 2013;148:
617–623.
24.Holman KH, Henke PK, Dimick JB, et al. Racial
disparities in the use of revascularization before legamputation in Medicare patients. J Vasc Surg . 2011;54:
420 –426, 426 e421 .
25.Tunis SR, Bass EB, Klag MJ, et al. Variation in uti-
lization of procedures for treatment of peripheralarterial disease. A look at patient characteristics. Arch
Intern Med . 1993;153:991 –998.
26.Holman KH, Henke PK, Dimick JB, et al. Racial
disparities in the use of revascularization before leg
amputation in Medicare patients. J Vasc Surg . 2011;54:
420 –426, 426.e1 .
27.Mustapha JA, Fisher BT Sr, Rizzo JA, et al.
Explaining racial disparities in amputation rates for thetreatment of peripheral artery disease (PAD) usingdecomposition methods. J Racial Ethn Health Dispar-
ities. 2017;4:784 –795.
28.Carr J. "Sprint to zero": a strategy to address
high rates of nontraumatic amputations in minority
communities. Am J Manag Care . 2017;23:SP578 –
SP579 .
29.Chen L, Zhang D, Shi L, et al. Disparities in pe-
ripheral artery disease hospitalizations identi ﬁed
among understudied race-ethnicity groups. Front Car-
diovasc Med . 2021;8:692236 .
30.Morrissey NJ, Giacovelli J, Egorova N, et al. Dis-
parities in the treatment and outcomes of vasculardisease in Hispanic patients. J Vasc Surg . 2007;46:971 –
978.
31.Luna P, Harris K, Castro-Dominguez Y, et al. Risk
proﬁles, access to care, and outcomes in Hispanics
hospitalized for lower extremity peripheral artery dis-ease. J Vasc Surg . 2023;77:216 –224.e15 .
32.Resnick HE, Valsania P, Phillips CL. Diabetes mel-
litus and nontraumatic lower extremity amputation inblack and white Americans: the National Health andNutrition Examination Survey Epidemiologic Follow-upStudy, 1971-1992. Arch Intern Med . 1999;159:2470 –
2475 .
33.Fanaroff AC, Yang L, Nathan AS, et al. Geographic
and socioeconomic disparities in major lower extremityamputation rates in metropolitan areas. J Am Heart
Assoc . 2021;10:e021456 .
34.Creager MA, Matsushita K, Arya S, et al. Reducing
nontraumatic lower-extremity amputations by 20% by2030: time to get to our feet: a policy statement fromthe American Heart Association. Circulation . 2021;143:
e875 –e891 .
4.2.2. Female Sex
1.Hirsch AT, Allison MA, Gomes AS, et al. A call to
action: women and peripheral artery disease: a scien-tiﬁc statement from the American Heart Association.
Circulation . 2012;125:1449 –1472 .
2.Pabon M, Cheng S, Altin SE, et al. Sex differences in
peripheral artery disease. Circ Res . 2022;130:496 –511.3.McDermott MM, Greenland P, Liu K, et al. Sex dif-
ferences in peripheral arterial disease: leg symptomsand physical functioning. J Am Geriatr Soc . 2003;51:
222–228.
4.Haine A, Kavanagh S, Berger JS, et al. Sex-speci ﬁc
risks of major cardiovascular and limb events in pa-
tients with symptomatic peripheral artery disease.
J Am Coll Cardiol . 2020;75:608 –617.
5.Parvar SL, Thiyagarajah A, Nerlekar N, et al.
A systematic review and meta-analysis of gender dif-ferences in long-term mortality and cardiovascularevents in peripheral artery disease. J Vasc Surg .
2021;73:1456 –1465.e7 .
6.Lefebvre KM, Chevan J. The persistence of gender
and racial disparities in vascular lower extremity
amputation: an examination of HCUP-NIS data (2002-
2011). Vasc Med . 2015;20:51 –59.
7.Lo RC, Bensley RP, Dahlberg SE, et al. Presentation,
treatment, and outcome differences between men andwomen undergoing revascularization or amputationfor lower extremity peripheral arterial disease. J Vasc
Surg. 2014;59:409 –418.e3 .
8.Scierka LE, Jelani QU, Smolderen KG, et al. Patient
representativeness of a peripheral artery disease
cohort in a randomized control trial versus a real-world
cohort: the CLEVER trial versus the PORTRAIT registry.Contemp Clin Trials . 2022;112:106624 .
9.Jin X, Chandramouli C, Allocco B, et al. Women ’s
participation in cardiovascular clinical trials from 2010to 2017. Circulation . 2020;141:540 –548.
10.Michos ED, Reddy TK, Gulati M, et al. Improving
the enrollment of women and racially/ethnicallydiverse populations in cardiovascular clinical trials: an
ASPC practice statement. Am J Prev Cardiol . 2021;8:
100250 .
4.2.3. Geography and Socioeconomic Status
1.Minc SD, Hendricks B, Misra R, et al. Geographic
variation in amputation rates among patients withdiabetes and/or peripheral arterial disease in the ruralstate of West Virginia identi ﬁes areas for improved
care. J Vasc Surg . 2020;71:1708 –1717.e5 .
2.Minc SD, Goodney PP, Misra R, et al. The effect of
rurality on the risk of primary amputation is ampli ﬁed
by race. J Vasc Surg . 2020;72:1011 –1017 .
3.Cross SH, Mehra MR, Bhatt DL, et al. Rural-urban
differences in cardiovascular mortality in the US,1999-2017. JAMA . 2020;323:1852 –1854 .
4.Hurst JE, Tehan PE, Hussey K, et al. Association of
peripheral artery disease and chronic limb-threateningischemia with socioeconomic deprivation in people
with diabetes: a population data-linkage and geo-
spatial analysis. Vasc Med . 2021;26:147 –154.
5.Parker MA, Weinberger AH, Eggers EM, et al. Trends
in rural and urban cigarette smoking quit ratios in the
US from 2010 to 2020. JAMA Netw Open . 2022;5:
e2225326 .
6.Harris JK, Beatty K, Leider JP, et al. The double
disparity facing rural local health departments. Annu
Rev Public Health . 2016;37:167 –184.
7.Peacock JM, Keo HH, Duval S, et al. The incidence
and health economic burden of ischemic amputation in
Minnesota, 2005-2008. Prev Chronic Dis . 2011;8:A141 .
8.Fanaroff AC, Yang L, Nathan AS, et al. Geographic
and socioeconomic disparities in major lower extremityGornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042578

amputation rates in metropolitan areas. J Am Heart
Assoc . 2021;10:e021456 .
9.Economic Innovation Group. Distressed commu-
nities [website]. Updated 2023. Accessed February 2,2023. https://eig.org/distressed-communities/
4.3. Considerations in Management of PAD in Older
Patients
1.Arya S, Khakharia A, Rothenberg KA, et al. Associa-
tion of peripheral artery disease with life-spacemobility restriction and mortality in community-dwelling older adults. J Vasc Surg . 2020;71:2098 –
2106.e1 .
2.Mallon T, Eisele M, Konig HH, et al. Lifestyle aspects
as a predictor of pain among oldest-old primary care
patients-a longitudinal cohort study. Clin Interv Aging .
2019;14:1881 –1888 .
3.Matsushita K, Ballew SH, Sang Y, et al. Ankle-
brachial index and physical function in older in-dividuals: the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities(ARIC) study. Atherosclerosis . 2017;257:208 –215.
4.Mii S, Guntani A, Kawakubo E, et al. Preoperative
nutritional status is an independent predictor of the
long-term outcome in patients undergoing open
bypass for critical limb ischemia. Ann Vasc Surg .
2020;64:202 –212.
5.Salomon du Mont L, Leclerc B, Morgant MC, et al.
Impact of nutritional state on critical limb ischemiaearly outcomes (DENUCRITICC study). Ann Vasc Surg .
2017;45:10 –15.
6.Matsuo Y, Kumakura H, Kanai H, et al. The geriatric
nutritional risk index predicts long-term survival andcardiovascular or limb events in peripheral arterial
disease. J Atheroscler Thromb . 2020;27:134 –143.
7.Sugai T, Watanabe T, Otaki Y, et al. Decreased psoas
muscle computed tomography value predicts poor
outcome in peripheral artery disease. Circ J . 2018;82:
3069 –3075 .
8.Vedder IR, Levolger S, Dierckx R, et al. Effect of
muscle depletion on survival in peripheral arterialocclusive disease: quality over quantity. J Vasc Surg .
2020;72:2006 –2016.e1 .
9.Pereira-Neves A, Barros D, Rocha-Neves J, et al.
Impact of sarcopenia in aortoiliac occlusive disease in
Mediterranean population. Turk Gogus Kalp Damar
Cerrahisi Derg . 2020;28:615 –622.
10.Rothenberg KA, George EL, Trickey AW, et al.
Assessment of the risk analysis index for prediction ofmortality, major complications, and length of stay inpatients who underwent vascular surgery. Ann Vasc
Surg. 2020;66:442
–453.
11.Takeji Y, Yamaji K, Tomoi Y, et al. Impact of frailty
on clinical outcomes in patients with critical limbischemia. Circ Cardiovasc Interv . 2018;11:e006778 .
12.Schaller MS, Ramirez JL, Gasper WJ, et al. Frailty is
associated with an increased risk of major adverse
cardiac events in patients with stable claudication. Ann
Vasc Surg . 2018;50:38 –45.
13.Yokoyama M, Watanabe T, Otaki Y, et al. Impact of
objective malnutrition status on the clinical outcomesin patients with peripheral artery disease followingendovascular therapy. Circ J . 2018;82:847 –856.14.Erben Y, Mena-Hurtado CI, Miller SM, et al.
Increased mortality in octogenarians treated for life-style limiting claudication. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv .
2018;91:1331 –1338 .
15.Hamdi A, Al-Zubeidy B, Obirieze A, et al. Lower
extremity arterial reconstruction in octogenarians and
older. Ann Vasc Surg . 2016;34:171 –177.
16.Song P, Rudan D, Zhu Y, et al. Global, regional, and
national prevalence and risk factors for peripheral ar-tery disease in 2015: an updated systematic review and
analysis. Lancet Glob Health . 2019;7:e1020 –e1030 .
17.Fihn SD, Gardin JM, Abrams J, et al. 2012 ACCF/
AHA/ACP/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS guideline for the
diagnosis and management of patients with stableischemic heart disease: a report of the American Col-lege of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Asso-ciation Task Force on Practice Guidelines, and theAmerican College of Physicians, American Association
for Thoracic Surgery, Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses
Association, Society for Cardiovascular Angiographyand Interventions, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2012;60:e44 –e164 .
18.Schwartz JB, Schmader KE, Hanlon JT, et al.
Pharmacotherapy in older adults with cardiovascular
disease: report from an American College of Cardiol-ogy, American Geriatrics Society, and National Insti-tute on Aging Workshop. J Am Geriatr Soc . 2019;67:
371–380.
19.Kantor ED, Rehm CD, Haas JS, et al. Trends in
prescription drug use among adults in the UnitedStates from 1999-2012. JAMA . 2015;314:1818 –1831.
20.Dinga Madou I, Slade MD, Orion KC, et al. The
impact of functional status on the outcomes of
endovascular lower extremity revascularization forcritical limb ischemia in the elderly. Ann Vasc Surg .
2017;45:42 –48.
21.Altin SE, Castro-Dominguez YS, Kennedy KF, et al.
Predictors of underutilization of medical therapy inpatients undergoing endovascular revascularization forperipheral artery disease. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv .
2020;13:2911 –2918 .
22.Addison O, Prior SJ, Kundi R, et al. Sarcopenia in
peripheral arterial disease: prevalence and effect on
functional status. Arch Phys Med Rehabil . 2018;99:
623–628.
23.Ma KF, Berends B, Vedder IR, et al. Quanti ﬁcation
of muscle mass in the legs of patients with peripheralarterial occlusive disease: associations between volu-metric and cross-sectional single-slice measurementsfor identi ﬁcation of atrophy and focal sarcopenia.
J Cardiovasc Surg (Torino) . 2019;60:672 –678.
24.Peters CML, de Vries J, Lodder P, et al. Is a good
quality of life and health status possible in older pa-
tients dying from critical limb-threatening ischemia: aprospective clinical study. Ann Vasc Surg . 2020;64:
198–201.
25.Klaphake S, de Leur K, Mulder PG, et al. Mortality
after major amputation in elderly patients with criticallimb ischemia. Clin Interv Aging . 2017;12:1985 –1992 .
26.Barshes NR, Menard MT, Nguyen LL, et al.
Infrainguinal bypass is associated with lower periop-
erative mortality than major amputation in high-risk
surgical candidates. J Vasc Surg . 2011;53:1251 –1259.e1 .27.Peters CML, de Vries J, Lodder P, et al. Quality of
life and not health status improves after majoramputation in the elderly critical limb ischaemia pa-tient. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg . 2019;57:547 –553.
5.1. Antiplatelet and Antithrombotic Therapy for
PAD
1.Antithrombotic Trialists Collaboration. Collaborative
meta-analysis of randomised trials of antiplatelettherapy for prevention of death, myocardial infarction,and stroke in high risk patients. BMJ. 2002;324:71 –86.
2.Critical Leg Ischaemia Prevention Study (CLIPS)
Group, Catalano M, Born G. Prevention of serious
vascular events by aspirin amongst patients with pe-
ripheral arterial disease: randomized, double-blindtrial. J Intern Med . 2007;261:276 –284.
3.Berger JS, Krantz MJ, Kittelson JM, et al. Aspirin for
the prevention of cardiovascular events in patientswith peripheral artery disease: a meta-analysis of
randomized trials. JAMA . 2009;301:1909 –1919 .
4.CAPRIE Steering Committee. A randomised, blin-
ded, trial of clopidogrel versus aspirin in patients atrisk of ischaemic events (CAPRIE). Lancet . 1996;348:
1329 –1339 .
5.Eikelboom JW, Connolly SJ, Bosch J, et al. Rivar-
oxaban with or without aspirin in stable cardiovascular
disease. N Engl J Med
. 2017;377:1319 –1330 .
6.Anand SS, Caron F, Eikelboom JW, et al. Major
adverse limb events and mortality in patients withperipheral artery disease: the COMPASS trial. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2018;71:2306 –2315 .
7.Bonaca MP, Bauersachs RM, Anand SS, et al. Rivar-
oxaban in peripheral artery disease after revasculari-
zation. N Engl J Med . 2020;382:1994 –2004 .
8.Gray WA, Keirse K, Soga Y, et al. A polymer-coated,
paclitaxel-eluting stent (Eluvia) versus a polymer-free,paclitaxel-coated stent (Zilver PTX) for endovascularfemoropopliteal intervention (IMPERIAL): a rando-mised, non-inferiority trial. Lancet . 2018;392:1541 –
1551.
9.Dake MD, Ansel GM, Jaff MR, et al. Durable clinical
effectiveness with paclitaxel-eluting stents in thefemoropopliteal artery: 5-year results of the Zilver PTXrandomized trial. Circulation . 2016;133:1472 –1483.
discussion 1483 .
10.Soden PA, Zettervall SL, Ultee KH, et al. Dual an-
tiplatelet therapy is associated with prolonged survival
after lower extremity revascularization. J Vasc Surg .
2016;64:1633 –1644.e1 .
11.Cho S, Lee YJ, Ko YG, et al. Optimal strategy for
antiplatelet therapy after endovascular revasculariza-tion for lower extremity peripheral artery disease. JA m
Coll Cardiol Intv . 2019;12:2359 –2370 .
12.Angiolillo DJ, Bhatt DL, Cannon CP, et al. Anti-
thrombotic therapy in patients with atrial ﬁbrillation
treated with oral anticoagulation undergoing percu-taneous coronary intervention: a North Americanperspective: 2021 update. Circulation . 2021;143:583 –
596.
13.Kumbhani DJ, Cannon CP, Beavers CJ, et al. 2020
ACC expert consensus decision pathway for anticoag-ulant and antiplatelet therapy in patients with atrialJACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2579

ﬁbrillation or venous thromboembolism undergoing
percutaneous coronary intervention or with athero-sclerotic cardiovascular disease: a report of theAmerican College of Cardiology Solution Set Oversight
Committee. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2021;77:629 –658.
14.Bonaca MP, Bhatt DL, Storey RF, et al. Ticagrelor
for prevention of ischemic events after myocardial
infarction in patients with peripheral artery disease.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2016;67:2719 –2728 .
15.Cacoub PP, Bhatt DL, Steg PG, et al. Patients with
peripheral arterial disease in the CHARISMA trial. Eur
Heart J . 2009;30:192 –201.
16.Bonaca MP, Scirica BM, Creager MA, et al. Vor-
apaxar in patients with peripheral artery disease: re-sults from TRA2
/C14P-TIMI 50. Circulation . 2013;127:
1522 –1529 .
17.Belch JJ, Dormandy J, Committee CW, et al. Re-
sults of the randomized, placebo-controlled clopi-
dogrel and acetylsalicylic acid in bypass surgery for
peripheral arterial disease (CASPAR) trial. J Vasc Surg .
2010;52:825 –833, 833 e821-822 .
18.Warfarin Antiplatelet Vascular Evaluation Trial In-
vestigators, Anand S, Yusuf S, et al. Oral anticoagulantand antiplatelet therapy and peripheral arterial dis-ease. N Engl J Med . 2007;357:217 –227.
19.Johnson WC, Williford WO. Department of Veterans
Affairs Cooperative Study #362. Bene ﬁts, morbidity,
and mortality associated with long-term administrationof oral anticoagulant therapy to patients with periph-
eral arterial bypass procedures: a prospective random-
ized study. J Vasc Surg . 2002;35:413 –421.
20.Efﬁcacy of oral anticoagulants compared with
aspirin after infrainguinal bypass surgery (The DutchBypass Oral Anticoagulants or Aspirin Study): a ran-domised trial. Lancet . 2000;355:346 –351.
21.Fowkes FG, Price JF, Stewart MC, et al. Aspirin for
prevention of cardiovascular events in a general popu-lation screened for a low ankle brachial index: a ran-domized controlled trial. JAMA . 2010;303:841 –848.
22.Belch J, MacCuish A, Campbell I, et al. The pre-
vention of progression of arterial disease and diabetes
(POPADAD) trial: factorial randomised placebo
controlled trial of aspirin and antioxidants in patientswith diabetes and asymptomatic peripheral arterialdisease. BMJ. 2008;337:a1840 .
23.Hiatt WR, Fowkes FG, Heizer G, et al. Ticagrelor
versus clopidogrel in symptomatic peripheral arterydisease. N Engl J Med . 2017;376:32 –40.
24.Chiarito M, Sanz-Sanchez J, Cannata F, et al.
Monotherapy with a P2Y12 inhibitor or aspirin forsecondary prevention in patients with established
atherosclerosis: a systematic review and meta-anal-
ysis. Lancet . 2020;395:1487 –1495 .
25.Anand SS, Bosch J, Eikelboom JW, et al. Rivarox-
aban with or without aspirin in patients with stableperipheral or carotid artery disease: an international,randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.Lancet . 2018;391:219 –229.
26.Joglar JA, Chung MK, Armbruster AL, et al. 2023
ACC/AHA/ACCP/HRS guideline for the diagnosis and
management of atrial ﬁbrillation. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2024;83:109 –279
.
27.Diehm C, Allenberg JR, Pittrow D, et al. Mortality
and vascular morbidity in older adults withasymptomatic versus symptomatic peripheral artery
disease. Circulation . 2009;120:2053 –2061 .
28.Sartipy F, Sigvant B, Lundin F, et al. Ten year
mortality in different peripheral arterial disease stages:a population based observational study on outcome.Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg . 2018;55:529 –536.
29.McDermott MM, Greenland P, Liu K, et al. The
ankle brachial index is associated with leg function and
physical activity: the Walking and Leg CirculationStudy. Ann Intern Med . 2002;136:873 –883.
30.Lee JY, Lee SW, Lee WS, et al. Prevalence and
clinical implications of newly revealed, asymptomaticabnormal ankle-brachial index in patients with signif-icant coronary artery disease. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv .
2013;6:1303 –1313.
31.Kleindorfer DO, Tow ﬁghi A, Chaturvedi S, et al.
2021 guideline for the prevention of stroke in patients
with stroke and transient ischemic attack: a guideline
from the American Heart Association/American StrokeAssociation. Stroke . 2021;52:e364 –e467 .
32.Virani SS, Newby LK, Arnold SV, et al. 2023 AHA/
ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA guideline for the manage-ment of patients with chronic coronary disease: a reportof the American Heart Association/American College ofCardiology Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guide-
lines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2023;82:833 –955.
33.FDA Vorapaxar label . 2014. Accessed March 1,
2021. https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_
docs/label/2014/204886s000lbl.pdf
34.Alonso-Coello P, Bellmunt S, McGorrian C, et al.
Antithrombotic therapy in peripheral artery disease:
Antithrombotic Therapy and Prevention of Throm-
bosis, 9th ed: American College of Chest PhysiciansEvidence-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines. Chest .
2012;141(Suppl 2):e669S –e690S .
5.2. Lipid-Lowering Therapy for PAD
1.Grundy SM, Stone NJ, Bailey AL, et al. 2018
AHA/ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/ADA/AGS/APhA/
ASPC/NLA/PCNA guideline on the management of
blood cholesterol: a report of the American College ofCardiology/American Heart Association Task Force onClinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;73:
e285 –e350 .
2.Pastori D, Farcomeni A, Milanese A, et al. Statins
and major adverse limb events in patients with pe-ripheral artery disease: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Thromb Haemost . 2020;120:866 –875.
3.Heart Protection Study Collaborative Group.
Randomized trial of the effects of cholesterol-
lowering with simvastatin on peripheral vascularand other major vascular outcomes in 20,536 peoplewith peripheral arterial disease and other high-riskconditions. JV a s cS u r g . 2007;45:645
–654; discus-
sion 653-654 .
4.Bonaca MP, Nault P, Giugliano RP, et al. Low-den-
sity lipoprotein cholesterol lowering with evolocumab
and outcomes in patients with peripheral artery dis-
ease: insights from the FOURIER trial (Further Car-diovascular Outcomes Research With PCSK9 Inhibitionin Subjects With Elevated Risk). Circulation . 2018;137:
338–350.
5.Jukema JW, Szarek M, Zijlstra LE, et al. Alirocumab
in patients with polyvascular disease and recent acute
coronary syndrome: ODYSSEY OUTCOMES trial. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2019;74:1167 –1176.6.Schwartz GG, Steg PG, Szarek M, et al. Peripheral
artery disease and venous thromboembolic events af-ter acute coronary syndrome: role of lipoprotein(a)and modi ﬁcation by alirocumab: prespeci ﬁed analysis
of the ODYSSEY OUTCOMES randomized clinical trial.
Circulation . 2020;141:1608 –1617.
7.Bonaca MP, Gutierrez JA, Cannon C, et al. Poly-
vascular disease, type 2 diabetes, and long-termvascular risk: a secondary analysis of the IMPROVE-IT trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol . 2018;6:934 –
943.
8.Colantonio LD, Hubbard D, Monda KL, et al.
Atherosclerotic risk and statin use among patients with
peripheral artery disease. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2020;76:
251–264.
9.Arya S, Khakharia A, Binney ZO, et al. Association of
statin dose with amputation and survival in patientswith peripheral artery disease. Circulation . 2018;137:
1435 –1446 .
10.Peters F, Kuchenbecker J, Kreutzburg T, et al.
Long-term effectiveness and safety of initiating statin
therapy after index revascularization in patients withperipheral arterial occlusive disease. J Am Heart Assoc .
2020;9:e018338 .
11.Khariton Y, Patel KK, Chan PS, et al. Guideline-
directed statin intensi ﬁcation in patients with new or
worsening symptoms of peripheral artery disease. Clin
Cardiol . 2018;41:1414 –1422 .
12.Suckow BD, Kraiss LW, Schanzer A, et al. Statin
therapy after infrainguinal bypass surgery for criticallimb ischemia is associated with improved 5-year sur-vival. J Vasc Surg . 2015;61:126 –133.
13.Stavroulakis K, Borowski M, Torsello G, et al.
Association between statin therapy and amputation-
free survival in patients with critical limb ischemiain the CRITISCH registry. J Vasc Surg . 2017;66:1534 –
1542
.
14.Foley TR, Singh GD, Kokkinidis DG, et al. High-in-
tensity statin therapy is associated with improvedsurvival in patients with peripheral artery disease. JA m
Heart Assoc . 2017;6:e005699 .
15.DeCarlo C, Scher L, Shariff S, et al. Statin use and
other factors associated with mortality after major
lower extremity amputation. J Vasc Surg . 2017;66:216 –
225.
16.Karlson BW, Wiklund O, Palmer MK, et al. Vari-
ability of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol responsewith different doses of atorvastatin, rosuvastatin, andsimvastatin: results from VOYAGER. Eur Heart J Car-
diovasc Pharmacother . 2016;2:212 –217.
17.U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Drugs@FDA:
FDA Approved Drug Products [database]. Accessed
March 1, 2021. https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/
scripts/cder/daf/
5.3. Antihypertensive Therapy for PAD
1.Piller LB, Simpson LM, Baraniuk S, et al. Character-
istics and long-term follow-up of participants withperipheral arterial disease during ALLHAT. J Gen Intern
Med. 2014;29:1475 –1483 .
2.Diehm C, Pittrow D, Lawall H. Effect of nebivolol vs.
hydrochlorothiazide on the walking capacity in hy-
pertensive patients with intermittent claudication.
J Hypertens . 2011;29:1448 –1456 .Gornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042580

3.Paravastu SC, Mendonca DA, Da Silva A. Beta
blockers for peripheral arterial disease. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev . 2013:CD005508 .
4.Espinola-Klein C, Weisser G, Jagodzinski A, et al.
b-Blockers in patients with intermittent claudication
and arterial hypertension: results from the nebivolol or
metoprolol in arterial occlusive disease trial. Hyper-
tension . 2011;58:148 –154.
5.Whelton PK, Carey RM, Aronow WS, et al.
2017 ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/ASPC/NMA/PCNA guideline for the prevention,detection, evaluation, and management of high bloodpressure in adults: a report of the American College ofCardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on
Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2018;71:
e127 –e248 .
6.Sprint Research Group, Wright JT Jr, Williamson JD,
et al. A randomized trial of intensive versus standardblood-pressure control. N Engl J Med . 2015;373:2103 –
2116 .
7.Bavry AA, Anderson RD, Gong Y, et al. Outcomes
among hypertensive patients with concomitant pe-ripheral and coronary artery disease: ﬁndings from the
INternational VErapamil-SR/Trandolapril STudy. Hy-
pertension . 2010;55:48 –53.
8.Itoga NK, Taw ﬁk DS, Lee CK, et al. Association of
blood pressure measurements with peripheral arterydisease events. Circulation . 2018;138:1805 –1814 .
9.Mehler PS, Coll JR, Estacio R, et al. Intensive blood
pressure control reduces the risk of cardiovascularevents in patients with peripheral arterial disease andtype 2 diabetes. Circulation . 2003;107:753 –756.
10.Sleight P. The HOPE Study (Heart Outcomes Pre-
vention Evaluation). J Renin Angiotensin Aldosterone
Syst. 2000;1:18 –20.
11.Investigators O, Yusuf S, Teo KK, et al. Telmisartan,
ramipril, or both in patients at high risk for vascular
events. N Engl J Med . 2008;358:1547 –1559 .
12.Armstrong EJ, Chen DC, Singh GD, et al. Angio-
tensin-converting enzyme inhibitor or angiotensin re-ceptor blocker use is associated with reduced majoradverse cardiovascular events among patients withcritical limb ischemia. Vasc Med . 2015;20:237 –244.
13.Lawes CM, Vander Hoorn S, Rodgers A, et al.
Global burden of blood-pressure-related disease,2001. Lancet . 2008;371:1513 –1518 .
14.Clement DL, De Buyzere ML, Duprez DA. Hyper-
tension in peripheral arterial disease. Curr Pharm Des .
2004;10:3615 –3620 .
15.
Kennedy M, Solomon C, Manolio TA, et al. Risk
factors for declining ankle-brachial index in men andwomen 65 years or older: the Cardiovascular HealthStudy. Arch Intern Med . 2005;165:1896 –1902 .
16.Fudim M, Hopley CW, Huang Z, et al. Association of
hypertension and arterial blood pressure on limb andcardiovascular outcomes in symptomatic peripheralartery disease: the EUCLID Trial. Circ Cardiovasc Qual
Outcomes . 2020;13:e006512 .
5.4. Smoking Cessation for PAD
1.Eckel RH, Jakicic JM, Ard JD, et al. 2013 AHA/ACC
guideline on lifestyle management to reduce cardio-vascular risk: a report of the American College ofCardiology/American Heart Association Task Force onPractice Guidelines. Circulation . 2014;129:S76 –S99.2.Stead LF, Buitrago D, Preciado N, et al. Physician
advice for smoking cessation. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev. 2013:CD000165 .
3.Patnode CD, Henderson JT, Thompson JH, et al.
Behavioral counseling and pharmacotherapy in-terventions for tobacco cessation in adults, including
pregnant women: a review of reviews for the U.S.
Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med .
2015;163:608 –621.
4.Hennrikus D, Joseph AM, Lando HA, et al. Effec-
tiveness of a smoking cessation program for peripheralartery disease patients: a randomized controlled trial.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2010;56:2105 –2112.
5.Rigotti NA, Pipe AL, Benowitz NL, et al. Ef ﬁcacy and
safety of varenicline for smoking cessation in patientswith cardiovascular disease: a randomized trial. Circu-
lation . 2010;121:221 –229.
6.Rigotti NA, Regan S, Levy DE, et al. Sustained care
intervention and postdischarge smoking cessationamong hospitalized adults: a randomized clinical trial.JAMA . 2014;312:719 –728.
7.Tonstad S, Farsang C, Klaene G, et al. Bupropion SR
for smoking cessation in smokers with cardiovasculardisease: a multicentre, randomised study. Eur Heart J .
2003;24:946 –955.
8.Mills EJ, Thorlund K, Eapen S, et al. Cardiovascular
events associated with smoking cessation pharmaco-
therapies: a network meta-analysis. Circulation .
2014;129:28 –41.
9.Prochaska JJ, Hilton JF. Risk of cardiovascular
serious adverse events associated with varenicline usefor tobacco cessation: systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ. 2012;344:e2856 .
10.United States Public Health Service Of ﬁce of the
Surgeon General; National Center for Chronic DiseasePrevention and Health Promotion (US) Of ﬁce on
Smoking and Health. Smoking Cessation: A Report of
the Surgeon General
. Washington (DC): US Department
of Health and Human Services; 2020 .
11.Mons U, Muezzinler A, Gellert C, et al. Impact of
smoking and smoking cessation on cardiovascularevents and mortality among older adults: meta-analysis of individual participant data from prospec-tive cohort studies of the CHANCES consortium. BMJ.
2015;350:h1551 .
12.Lv X, Sun J, Bi Y, et al. Risk of all-cause mortality
and cardiovascular disease associated with second-
hand smoke exposure: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Cardiol . 2015;199:106 –115.
13.Lu L, Mackay DF, Pell JP. Secondhand smoke
exposure and risk of incident peripheral arterial diseaseand mortality: a Scotland-wide retrospective cohortstudy of 4045 non-smokers with cotinine measure-ment. BMC Public Health . 2018;18:348 .
14.Ngu NL, McEvoy M. Environmental tobacco smoke
and peripheral arterial disease: a review. Atheroscle-
rosis. 2017;266:113 –120.
15.Willigendael EM, Teijink JA, Bartelink ML, et al.
Inﬂuence of smoking on incidence and prevalence of
peripheral arterial disease. J Vasc Surg . 2004;40:1158 –
1165 .
16.Duval S, Long KH, Roy SS, et al. The contribution of
tobacco use to high health care utilization and medicalcosts in peripheral artery disease: a state-based cohortanalysis. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2015;66:1566 –1574 .17.Ding N, Sang Y, Chen J, et al. Cigarette smoking,
smoking cessation, and long-term risk of 3 majoratherosclerotic diseases. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;74:
498 –507.
18.Rigotti NA, Tindle HA, Regan S, et al. A post-
discharge smoking-cessation intervention for hospitalpatients: Helping Hand 2 randomized clinical trial. Am
J Prev Med . 2016;51:597 –608.
19.Rose JJ, Krishnan-Sarin S, Exil VJ, et al. Car-
diopulmonary impact of electronic cigarettes andvaping products: a scienti ﬁc statement from the
American Heart Association. Circulation . 2023;148:
703–728.
20.Bhatnagar A, Whitsel LP, Ribisl KM, et al. Elec-
tronic cigarettes: a policy statement from the Amer-
ican Heart Association. Circulation . 2014;130:1418 –
1436 .
21.Bhatnagar A, Maziak W, Eissenberg T, et al. Water
pipe (hookah) smoking and cardiovascular disease risk:
a scienti ﬁc statement from the American Heart Asso-
ciation. Circulation . 2019;139:e917
–e936 .
22.Hoel AW, Nolan BW, Goodney PP, et al. Variation in
smoking cessation after vascular operations. J Vasc
Surg. 2013;57:1338 –1344; quiz 1344.e1-4 .
23.Armstrong EJ, Wu J, Singh GD, et al. Smoking
cessation is associated with decreased mortality and
improved amputation-free survival among patients
with symptomatic peripheral artery disease. J Vasc
Surg. 2014;60:1565 –1571.
24.Clair C, Rigotti NA, Porneala B, et al. Association of
smoking cessation and weight change with cardiovas-
cular disease among adults with and without diabetes.JAMA . 2013;309:1014 –1021 .
25.Selvarajah S, Black JH 3rd, Malas MB, et al. Pre-
operative smoking is associated with early graft failureafter infrainguinal bypass surgery. J Vasc Surg .
2014;59:1308 –1314.
26.Ekezie W, Murray RL, Agrawal S, et al. Quality of
smoking cessation advice in guidelines of tobacco-related diseases: an updated systematic review. Clin
Med (Lond) . 2020;20:551 –559.
27.Tonstad S, Lawrence D. Varenicline in smokers with
diabetes: a pooled analysis of 15 randomized, placebo-controlled studies of varenicline. J Diabetes Investig .
2017;8:93 –100.
28.West R. Tobacco smoking: health impact, preva-
lence, correlates and interventions. Psychol Health .
2017;32:1018 –1036 .
29.Malas M, van der Tempel J, Schwartz R, et al.
Electronic cigarettes for smoking cessation: a sys-tematic review. Nicotine Tob Res . 2016;18:1926 –
1936 .
30.Hartmann-Boyce J, McRobbie H, Lindson N, et al.
Electronic cigarettes for smoking cessation. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev . 2020;10:CD010216 .
31.Hajek P, Phillips-Waller A, Przulj D, et al.
A randomized trial of e-cigarettes versus nicotine-replacement therapy. N Engl J Med . 2019;380:629 –
637.
32.Patel KK, Jones PG, Ellerbeck EF, et al. Underuti-
lization of evidence-based smoking cessation supportstrategies despite high smoking addiction burden inperipheral artery disease specialty care: insights fromJACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2581

the international PORTRAIT registry. J Am Heart Assoc .
2018;7:e010076 .
33.Barua RS, Rigotti NA, Benowitz NL, et al. 2018
ACC expert consensus decision pathway on tobaccocessation treatment: a report of the AmericanCollege of Cardiology Task Force on Clinical ExpertConsensus Documents. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2018;72:
3332 –3365 .
34.Schober W, Fembacher L, Frenzen A, et al. Passive
exposure to pollutants from conventional cigarettesand new electronic smoking devices (IQOS, e-ciga-rette) in passenger cars. Int J Hyg Environ Health .
2019;222:486 –493.
35.Tan CE, Glantz SA. Association between smoke-
free legislation and hospitalizations for cardiac, cere-brovascular, and respiratory diseases: a meta-analysis.
Circulation . 2012;126:2177 –2183 .
5.5. Diabetes Management for PAD
1.Marso SP, Daniels GH, Brown-Frandsen K, et al.
Liraglutide and cardiovascular outcomes in type 2diabetes. N Engl J Med . 2016;375:311 –322.
2.Cosmi F, Laini R, Nicolucci A. Semaglutide and car-
diovascular outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes.N Engl J Med . 2017;376:890 .
3.Pfeffer MA, Claggett B, Diaz R, et al. Lixisenatide in
patients with type 2 diabetes and acute coronarysyndrome. N Engl J Med . 2015;373:2247 –2257 .
4.Gerstein HC, Colhoun HM, Dagenais GR, et al.
Dulaglutide and cardiovascular outcomes in type 2diabetes (REWIND): a double-blind, randomisedplacebo-controlled trial. Lancet . 2019;394:121 –130.
5.Holman RR, Bethel MA, Mentz RJ, et al. Effects
of once-weekly exenatide on cardiovascular out-comes in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med . 2017;377:
1228 –1239 .
6.Verma S, Al-Omran M, Leiter LA, et al. Cardiovas-
cular ef ﬁcacy of liraglutide and semaglutide in in-
dividuals with diabetes and peripheral artery disease.Diabetes Obes Metab . 2022;24:1288 –1299 .
7.Zinman B, Wanner C, Lachin JM, et al. Empagli ﬂozin,
cardiovascular outcomes, and mortality in type 2 dia-betes. N Engl J Med . 2015;373:2117 –2128 .
8.Wiviott SD, Raz I, Bonaca MP, et al. Dapagli ﬂozin
and cardiovascular outcomes in type 2 diabetes. N Engl
J Med . 2019;380:347 –357.
9.Cannon CP, Pratley R, Dagogo-Jack S, et al. Car-
diovascular outcomes with ertugli ﬂozin in type 2 dia-
betes. N Engl J Med . 2020;383:1425 –1435 .
10.Neal B, Perkovic V, Mahaffey KW, et al. Canagli-
ﬂozin and cardiovascular and renal events in type 2
diabetes. N Engl J Med . 2017;377:644 –657.
11.Perkovic V, Jardine MJ, Neal B, et al. Canagli ﬂozin
and renal outcomes in type 2 diabetes and nephropa-
thy. N Engl J Med . 2019;380:2295 –2306 .
12.Heyward J, Mansour O, Olson L, et al. Association
between sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT2) in-hibitors and lower extremity amputation: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. PLoS One . 2020;15:
e0234065 .
13.Lane KL, Abusamaan MS, Voss BF, et al. Glycemic
control and diabetic foot ulcer outcomes: a systematicreview and meta-analysis of observational studies.
J Diabetes Complications . 2020;34:107638 .
14.Takahara M, Kaneto H, Iida O, et al. The in ﬂuence
of glycemic control on the prognosis of Japanese pa-tients undergoing percutaneous transluminal angio-plasty for critical limb ischemia. Diabetes Care .
2010;33:2538 –2542 .
15.Singh S, Armstrong EJ, Sherif W, et al. Association
of elevated fasting glucose with lower patency andincreased major adverse limb events among patientswith diabetes undergoing infrapopliteal balloon an-gioplasty. Vasc Med . 2014;19:307 –314.
16.Arya S, Binney ZO, Khakharia A, et al. High hemo-
globin A(1c) associated with increased adverse limbevents in peripheral arterial disease patients under-going revascularization. J Vasc Surg . 2018;67:217 –228.
e1.
17.ElSayed NA, Aleppo G, Aroda VR, et al. Introduc-
tion and methodology: standards of care in diabetes-2023. Diabetes Care . 2023;46:S1 –S4.
18.Low Wang CC, Blomster JI, Heizer G, et al. Car-
diovascular and limb outcomes in patients with dia-betes and peripheral artery disease: the EUCLID trial.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2018;72:3274 –3284 .
19.Resnick HE, Carter EA, Sosenko JM, et al. Incidence
of lower-extremity amputation in American Indians:the Strong Heart Study. Diabetes Care . 2004;27:1885 –
1891 .
20.Nicholls SJ, Bhatt DL, Buse JB, et al. Comparison
of tirzepatide and dulaglutide on major adverse car-
diovascular events in participants with type 2 diabetesand atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease: SURPASS-CVOT design and baseline characteristics. Am Heart J .
2024;267:1 –11.
21.U.S. Food and Drug Administration. FDA removes
boxed warning about risk of leg and foot amputations
for the diabetes medicine canagli ﬂozin (Invokana,
Invokamet, Invokamet XR). 2020. Accessed March 1,2021. https://www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-safety-and-
availability/fda-removes-boxed-warning-about-risk-leg-and-foot-amputations-diabetes-medicine-canagli ﬂozin
22.Heidenreich PA, Bozkurt B, Aguilar D, et al. 2022
AHA/ACC/HFSA guideline for the management ofheart failure: a report of the American College ofCardiology/American Heart Association Joint Commit-
tee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2022;79:e263 –e421 .
23.Criqui MH, Aboyans V. Epidemiology of peripheral
artery disease. Circ Res . 2015;116:1509 –1526 .
24.Marso SP, Hiatt WR. Peripheral arterial disease in
patients with diabetes. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2006;47:
921–929.
25.Jude EB, Oyibo SO, Chalmers N, et al. Peripheral
arterial disease in diabetic and nondiabetic patients: acomparison of severity and outcome. Diabetes Care .
2001;24:1433 –1437 .
26.Su JB, Zhao LH, Zhang XL, et al. HbA1c vari-
ability and diabetic peripheral neuropathy in type
2d i a b e t i cp a t i e n t s . Cardiovasc Diabetol .2 0 1 8 ; 1 7 :
47.
27.American Diabetes Associ ation. 11. Microvascular
complications and foot care: standards of medicalcare in diabetes-2019. Diabetes Care .2 0 1 9 ; 4 2 : S 1 2 4 –
S138 .5.6. Other Medical Therapies for Cardiovascular Risk
Reduction in PAD
1.Davis MM, Taubert K, Benin AL, et al. In ﬂuenza
vaccination as secondary prevention for cardiovasculardisease: a science advisory from the American HeartAssociation/American College of Cardiology. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2006;48:1498 –1502 .
2.Gurﬁnkel EP, Leon de la Fuente R, Mendiz O, et al.
Flu vaccination in acute coronary syndromes andplanned percutaneous coronary interventions (FLU-
VACS) Study. Eur Heart J . 2004;25:25 –31.
3.Ciszewski A, Bilinska ZT, Brydak LB, et al. In ﬂuenza
vaccination in secondary prevention from coronary
ischaemic events in coronary artery disease: FLUCAD
study. Eur Heart J . 2008;29:1350 –1358 .
4.Phrommintikul A, Kuanprasert S, Wongcharoen W,
et al. In ﬂuenza vaccination reduces cardiovascular
events in patients with acute coronary syndrome. Eur
Heart J . 2011;32:1730 –1735.
5.Udell JA, Zawi R, Bhatt DL, et al. Association be-
tween in ﬂuenza vaccination and cardiovascular out-
comes in high-risk patients: a meta-analysis. JAMA .
2013;310:1711 –1720 .
6.Fontana L. Interventions to promote car-
diometabolic health and slow cardiovascular ageing.Nat Rev Cardiol . 2018;15:566 –577.
7.Arnett DK, Blumenthal RS, Albert MA, et al. 2019
ACC/AHA guideline on the primary prevention of car-diovascular disease: a report of the American Collegeof Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Forceon Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2019;74:e177 –e232 .
8.Appel LJ, Moore TJ, Obarzanek E, et al. A clinical
trial of the effects of dietary patterns on blood pres-
sure. DASH Collaborative Research Group. N Engl J
Med. 1997;336:1117 –1124.
9.Cook NR, Cutler JA, Obarzanek E, et al. Long term
effects of dietary sodium reduction on cardiovasculardisease outcomes: observational follow-up of the tri-als of hypertension prevention (TOHP). BMJ.
2007;334:885 –888.
10.Estruch R, Ros E, Salas-Salvado J, et al. Primary
prevention of cardiovascular disease with a Mediter-ranean diet supplemented with extra-virgin olive oil or
nuts. N Engl J Med . 2018;378:e34 .
11.Ruiz-Canela M, Estruch R, Corella D, et al. Associ-
ation of Mediterranean diet with peripheral arterydisease: the PREDIMED randomized trial. JAMA .
2014;311:415 –417.
12.Martinez-Gonzalez MA, Sanchez-Tainta A,
Corella D, et al. A provegetarian food pattern andreduction in total mortality in the Prevencion con DietaMediterranea (PREDIMED) study. Am J Clin Nutr .
2014;100(Suppl 1):320S –328S .
13.Ciccarone E, Di Castelnuovo A, Salcuni M, et al.
A high-score Mediterranean dietary pattern is associ-
ated with a reduced risk of peripheral arterial disease
in Italian patients with type 2 diabetes. J Thromb
Haemost . 2003;1:1744 –1752 .
14.de Lorgeril M, Salen P, Martin JL, et al. Mediter-
ranean diet, traditional risk factors, and the rate ofcardiovascular complications after myocardial infarc-tion: ﬁnal report of the Lyon Diet Heart Study. Circu-
lation . 1999;99:779 –785.Gornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042582

15.Wan D, Li V, Ban ﬁeld L, et al. Diet and nutrition in
peripheral artery disease: a systematic review. Can J
Cardiol . 2022;38:672 –680.
16.Lonn E, Yusuf S, Arnold MJ, et al. Homocysteine
lowering with folic acid and B vitamins in vasculardisease. N Engl J Med . 2006;354:1567 –1577.
17.Khandanpour N, Loke YK, Meyer FJ, et al. Homo-
cysteine and peripheral arterial disease: systematic
review and meta-analysis. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg .
2009;38:316 –322.
18.Andras A, Stansby G, Hansrani M. Homocysteine
lowering interventions for peripheral arterial diseaseand bypass grafts. Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2013:
CD003285 .
19.Villarruz-Sulit MV, Forster R, Dans AL, et al. Che-
lation therapy for atherosclerotic cardiovascular dis-ease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2020;5:CD002785 .
20.Ujueta F, Arenas IA, Escolar E, et al. The effect of
EDTA-based chelation on patients with diabetes and
peripheral artery disease in the Trial to Assess Chela-
tion Therapy (TACT). J Diabetes Complications .
2019;33:490 –494.
21.Barbarawi M, Kheiri B, Zayed Y, et al. Vitamin D
supplementation and cardiovascular disease risks inmore than 83000 individuals in 21 randomized clinicaltrials: a meta-analysis. JAMA Cardiol . 2019;4:765 –776.
22.Veronese N, De Rui M, Bolzetta F, et al. Serum 25-
hydroxyvitamin D and the incidence of peripheral ar-
tery disease in the elderly: the Pro.V.A study.
J Atheroscler Thromb . 2015;22:726 –734.
23.Rapson IR, Michos ED, Alonso A, et al. Serum 25-
hydroxyvitamin D is associated with incident periph-eral artery disease among white and black adults in theARIC study cohort. Atherosclerosis . 2017;257:123 –129.
24.Mazidi M, Wong ND, Katsiki N, et al. Dietary pat-
terns, plasma vitamins and trans fatty acids are asso-ciated with peripheral artery disease. Lipids Health Dis .
2017;16:254 .
25.Krishna SM. Vitamin D as a protector of arterial
health: potential role in peripheral arterial disease
formation. Int J Mol Sci . 2019;20:4907 .
26.Hiatt WR, Fowkes FG, Heizer G, et al. Ticagrelor
versus clopidogrel in symptomatic peripheral arterydisease. N Engl J Med . 2017;376:32 –40.
27.
Bonaca MP, Bauersachs RM, Anand SS, et al.
Rivaroxaban in peripheral artery disease after revas-cularization. N Engl J Med . 2020;382:1994 –2004 .
28.Smolderen KG, Lee M, Arora T, et al. Peripheral
artery disease and COVID-19 outcomes: insights fromthe Yale DOM-CovX registry. Curr Probl Cardiol . 2021:
101007 .
29.Kuno T, Takahashi M, Obata R, et al. Cardiovascular
comorbidities, cardiac injury, and prognosis of COVID-
19 in New York City. Am Heart J . 2020;226:24 –25.
30.Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Vac-
cines for COVID-19. Centers for Disease Control andPrevention. Accessed August 22, 2023. https://www.
cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/vaccines/index.html
5.7. Medication for Leg Symptoms in Chronic
Symptomatic PAD
1.Bedenis R, Stewart M, Cleanthis M, et al. Cilostazol
for intermittent claudication. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev. 2014:CD003748 .2.Mohammed M, Gosch K, Sa ﬂey D, et al. Cilostazol
and peripheral artery disease-speci ﬁc health status in
ambulatory patients with symptomatic PAD. Int J
Cardiol . 2020;316:222 –228.
3.Ma B, Fan X, Liu P. Therapeutic effects of medica-
tion use on intermittent claudication: a network meta-
analysis. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol . 2021;77:253 –262.
4.Farkas K, Kolossvary E, Jarai Z. Simple assessment
of quality of life and lower limb functional capacityduring cilostazol treatment - results of the SHort-tERm cIlostazol eFFicacy and quality of life(SHERIFF) study. Vasa . 2020;49:235 –242.
5.Soga Y, Hamasaki T, Edahiro R, et al. Sustained
effectiveness of cilostazol after endovascular treat-ment of femoropopliteal lesions: midterm follow-upfrom the Suf ﬁcient Treatment of Peripheral Interven-
tion by Cilostazol (STOP-IC) study. J Endovasc Ther .
2018;25:306 –312.
6.Megaly M, Abraham B, Saad M, et al. Outcomes with
cilostazol after endovascular therapy of peripheralartery disease. Vasc Med . 2019;24:313 –323.
7.Zen K, Takahara M, Iida O, et al. Drug-eluting
stenting for femoropopliteal lesions, followed by cil-ostazol treatment, reduces stent restenosis in patientswith symptomatic peripheral artery disease. J Vasc
Surg. 2017;65:720 –725.
8.Otsuka Pharmaceutical Co. Pletal (cilostazol)
[package insert]. Updated May 17, 2017. https://
www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2017/
020863s024lbl.pdf
9.Packer M, Carver JR, Rodeheffer RJ, et al. The
PROMISE Study Research Group. Effect of oral milri-none on mortality in severe chronic heart failure.N Engl J Med . 1991;325:1468 –1475 .
10.Hiatt WR, Money SR, Brass EP. Long-term safety of
cilostazol in patients with peripheral artery disease:the CASTLE study (Cilostazol: A Study in Long-term
Effects). J Vasc Surg . 2008;47:330 –336.
11.Salhiyyah K, Forster R, Senanayake E, et al. Pen-
toxifylline for intermittent claudication. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev . 2015;9:CD005262 .
12.Dawson DL, Cutler BS, Hiatt WR, et al.
A comparison of cilostazol and pentoxifylline fortreating intermittent claudication. Am J Med .
2000;109:523 –530.
13.Villarruz-Sulit MV, Forster R, Dans AL, et al. Che-
lation therapy for atherosclerotic cardiovascular dis-ease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2020;5:CD002785 .
14.Lee C, Nelson PR. Effect of cilostazol prescribed in
a pragmatic treatment program for intermittent clau-
dication. Vasc Endovascular Surg . 2014;48:224 –229.
5.8. Preventive Foot Care for PAD
1.Miikkola M, Lantta T, Suhonen R, et al. Challenges of
foot self-care in older people: a qualitative focus-
group study. J Foot Ankle Res . 2019;12:5 .
2.Nguyen TPL, Edwards H, Do TND, et al. Effective-
ness of a theory-based foot care education program(3STEPFUN) in improving foot self-care behavioursand foot risk factors for ulceration in people with type2 diabetes. Diabetes Res Clin Pract . 2019;152:29 –38.
3.Siersma V, Koster-Rasmussen R, Bruun C, et al. Vi-
sual impairment and mortality in patients with type 2diabetes. BMJ Open Diabetes Res Care . 2019;7:
e000638 .4.Polikandrioti M, Vasilopoulos G, Koutelekos I,
et al. Quality of life in diabetic foot ulcer: associatedfactors and the impact of anxiety/depression andadherence to self-care. Int J Low Extrem Wounds .
2020;19:165 –179.
5.Chen H, Cai C, Xie J. The effect of an intensive pa-
tients ’education program on anxiety, depression and
patient global assessment in diabetic foot ulcer pa-tients with Wagner grade 1/2: a randomized,controlled study. Medicine (Baltimore) . 2020;99:
e18480 .
6.Jupiter DC, Thorud JC, Buckley CJ, et al. The impact
of foot ulceration and amputation on mortality indiabetic patients. I: From ulceration to death, a sys-
tematic review. Int Wound J . 2016;13:892 –903.
7.
Hoogeveen RC, Dorresteijn JA, Kriegsman DM, et al.
Complex interventions for preventing diabetic foot
ulceration. Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2015:
CD007610 .
8.Hingorani A, LaMuraglia GM, Henke P, et al. The
management of diabetic foot: a clinical practiceguideline by the Society for Vascular Surgery incollaboration with the American Podiatric MedicalAssociation and the Society for Vascular Medicine.
J Vasc Surg . 2016;63(Suppl 2):3S –21S.
9.Bus SA. Innovations in plantar pressure and foot
temperature measurements in diabetes. Diabetes
Metab Res Rev . 2016;32(Suppl 1):221 –226.
10.Kolte D, Parikh SA, Piazza G, et al. Vascular teams
in peripheral vascular disease. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2019;73:2477 –2486 .
11.Zierler RE, Jordan WD, Lal BK, et al. The Society for
Vascular Surgery practice guidelines on follow-up aftervascular surgery arterial procedures. J Vasc Surg .
2018;68:256 –284.
12.Venermo M, Sprynger M, Desormais I, et al. Editor ’s
choice - follow-up of patients after revascularisation
for peripheral arterial diseases: a consensus document
from the European Society of Cardiology WorkingGroup on Aorta and Peripheral Vascular Diseases andthe European Society for Vascular Surgery. Eur J Vasc
Endovasc Surg . 2019;58:641 –653.
13.Hicks CW, Canner JK, Lum YW, et al. Long-term
outcomes of an endovascular- ﬁrst approach for dia-
betic patients with predominantly tibial disease
treated in a multidisciplinary setting. Ann Vasc Surg .
2019;60:315 –326.e2 .
14.Dhand S. Multidisciplinary approach to PAD: who ’s
on your team? Semin Intervent Radiol . 2018;35:378 –
383.
15.Sloan FA, Feinglos MN, Grossman DS. Receipt of
care and reduction of lower extremity amputations in anationally representative sample of U.S. elderly.Health Serv Res . 2010;45:1740 –1762 .
16.Botros M, Kuhnke J, Embil JM, et al. Best practice
recommendations for the prevention and management
of diabetic foot ulcers. Foundations of Best Practice for
Skin and Wound Management . 2017:1 –68.
17.Armstrong DG, Boulton AJM, Bus SA. Diabetic foot
ulcers and their recurrence. N Engl J Med . 2017;376:
2367
–2375 .
18.Diabetes and foot problems. National Institute of
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. AccessedJune 6, 2021. https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-
information/diabetes/overview/preventing-problems/foot-problemsJACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2583

19.Diabetes and your feet. Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention. Accessed June 6, 2021. https://www.
cdc.gov/diabetes/library/features/healthy-feet.html
20.Foot complications. American Diabetes Associa-
tion. Accessed June 6, 2021. https://www.diabetes.
org/diabetes/foot-complications
21.Schaper NC, van Netten JJ, Apelqvist J, et al.
Practical guidelines on the prevention and manage-
ment of diabetic foot disease (IWGDF 2019 update).Diabetes Metab Res Rev . 2020;36(Suppl 1):e3266 .
22.Woody J. Overview of diabetic foot care for the
nurse practitioner. The Journal for Nurse Practitioners .
2020;16:28 –33.
23.Alahakoon C, Fernando M, Galappaththy C, et al.
Meta-analyses of randomized controlled trials report-ing the effect of home foot temperature monitoring,patient education or of ﬂoading footwear on the inci-
dence of diabetes-related foot ulcers. Diabet Med .
2020;37:1266 –1279 .
24.Conte MS, Bradbury AW, Kolh P, et al. Global
vascular guidelines on the management of chroniclimb-threatening ischemia. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg .
2019;58(Suppl 1):S1 –S109.e33 .
25.Neville RF, Kayssi A. Development of a limb-
preservation program. Blood Purif . 2017;43:218 –225.
6. Exercise Therapy for PAD
1.Harwood AE, Cayton T, Sarvanandan R, et al.
A review of the potential local mechanisms by which
exercise improves functional outcomes in intermittentclaudication. Ann Vasc Surg . 2016;30:312 –320.
2.Bronas UG, Regensteiner JG. Connecting the past to
the present: a historical review of exercise training forperipheral artery disease. Vasc Med . 2022;27:174 –185.
3.Englund EK, Langham MC, Wehrli FW, et al. Impact
of supervised exercise on skeletal muscle blood ﬂow
and vascular function measured with MRI in patientswith peripheral artery disease. Am J Physiol Heart Circ
Physiol . 2022;323:H388 –H396 .
4.McDermott MM, Dayanidhi S, Kosmac K, et al.
Walking exercise therapy effects on lower extremity
skeletal muscle in peripheral artery disease. Circ Res .
2021;128:1851 –1867 .
5.McDermott MM, Spring B, Tian L, et al. Effect of
low-intensity vs high-intensity home-based walkingexercise on walk distance in patients with peripheralartery disease: the LITE randomized clinical trial.JAMA . 2021;325:1266 –1276 .
6.Gardner AW, Parker DE, Montgomery PS, et al.
Step-monitored home exercise improves ambulation,
vascular function, and in ﬂammation in symptomatic
patients with peripheral artery disease: a randomizedcontrolled trial. J Am Heart Assoc . 2014;3:e001107 .
7.Treat-Jacobson D, McDermott MM, Bronas UG,
et al. Optimal exercise programs for patients withperipheral artery disease: a scienti ﬁc statement from
the American Heart Association. Circulation . 2019;139:
e700 –e710 .
8.McDermott MM, Liu K, Guralnik JM, et al. Home-
based walking exercise intervention in peripheral ar-
tery disease: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA .
2013;310:57 –65.
9.McDermott MM, Guralnik JM, Criqui MH, et al.
Home-based walking exercise in peripheral arterydisease: 12-month follow-up of the GOALS randomizedtrial. J Am Heart Assoc . 2014;3:e000711 .10.Gardner AW, Parker DE, Montgomery PS, et al.
Efﬁcacy of quanti ﬁed home-based exercise and su-
pervised exercise in patients with intermittent claudi-cation: a randomized controlled trial. Circulation .
2011;123:491 –498.
11.Golledge J, Singh TP, Alahakoon C, et al. Meta-
analysis of clinical trials examining the bene ﬁto f
structured home exercise in patients with peripheralartery disease. Br J Surg . 2019;106:319 –331.
12.Mays RJ, Hiatt WR, Casserly IP, et al. Community-
based walking exercise for peripheral artery disease:an exploratory pilot study. Vasc Med . 2015;20:339 –
347.
13.Manfredini R, Lamberti N, Manfredini F, et al.
Gender differences in outcomes following a pain-free,home-based exercise program for claudication.J Womens Health (Larchmt) . 2019;28:1313 –1321.
14.Duscha BD, Piner LW, Patel MP, et al. Effects of a
12-week mHealth program on functional capacity andphysical activity in patients with peripheral arterydisease. Am J Cardiol . 2018;122:879 –884.
15.Bearne LM, Volkmer B, Peacock J, et al. Effect of a
home-based, walking exercise behavior change inter-
vention vs usual care on walking in adults with pe-ripheral artery disease: the MOSAIC randomizedclinical trial. JAMA . 2022;327:1344 –1355 .
16.Hiatt WR, Regensteiner JG, Hargarten ME, et al.
Beneﬁt of exercise conditioning for patients with pe-
ripheral arterial disease.
Circulation . 1990;81:602 –
609.
17.Murphy TP, Cutlip DE, Regensteiner JG, et al. Su-
pervised exercise versus primary stenting for claudi-
cation resulting from aortoiliac peripheral arterydisease: six-month outcomes from the claudication:exercise versus endoluminal revascularization(CLEVER) study. Circulation . 2012;125:130 –139.
18.Murphy TP, Cutlip DE, Regensteiner JG, et al. Su-
pervised exercise, stent revascularization, or medicaltherapy for claudication due to aortoiliac peripheralartery disease: the CLEVER study. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2015;65:999 –1009 .
19.Parmenter BJ, Dieberg G, Smart NA. Exercise
training for management of peripheral arterial disease:a systematic review and meta-analysis. Sports Med .
2015;45:231 –244.
20.Parmenter BJ, Dieberg G, Phipps G, et al. Exercise
training for health-related quality of life in peripheral
artery disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis.Vasc Med . 2015;20:30 –40.
21.Pilz M, Kandioler-Honetz E, Wenkstetten-Holub A,
et al. Evaluation of 6- and 12-month supervised ex-
ercise training on strength and endurance parameters
in patients with peripheral arterial disease. Wien Klin
Wochenschr . 2014;126:383 –389.
22.Regensteiner JG. Exercise in the treatment of
claudication: assessment and treatment of functional
impairment. Vasc Med . 1997;2:238 –242.
23.Regensteiner JG, Steiner JF, Hiatt WR. Exercise
training improves functional status in patients withperipheral arterial disease. J Vasc Surg . 1996;23:104 –
115.
24.Stewart KJ, Hiatt WR, Regensteiner JG, et al. Ex-
ercise training for claudication. N Engl J Med .
2002;347:1941 –1951.
25.Fakhry F, Rouwet EV, den Hoed PT, et al. Long-
term clinical effectiveness of supervised exercisetherapy versus endovascular revascularization for
intermittent claudication from a randomized clinicaltrial. Br J Surg . 2013;100:1164 –1171.
26.Lane R, Harwood A, Watson L, et al. Exercise for
intermittent claudication. Cochrane Database Syst Rev .
2017;12:CD000990 .
27.McDermott MM, Ferrucci L, Tian L, et al. Effect of
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factorwith or without supervised exercise on walking per-formance in patients with peripheral artery disease:the PROPEL randomized clinical trial. JAMA . 2017;318:
2089 –
2098 .
28.Hageman D, Fokkenrood HJ, Gommans LN, et al.
Supervised exercise therapy versus home-based exer-
cise therapy versus walking advice for intermittent
claudication. Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2018;4:
CD005263 .
29.Saratzis A, Paraskevopoulos I, Patel S, et al. Su-
pervised exercise therapy and revascularization forintermittent claudication: network meta-analysis ofrandomized controlled trials. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv .
2019;12:1125 –1136.
30.Pandey A, Banerjee S, Ngo C, et al. Comparative
efﬁcacy of endovascular revascularization versus su-
pervised exercise training in patients with intermit-tent claudication: meta-analysis of randomizedcontrolled trials. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv . 2017;10:712 –
724.
31.Klaphake S, Buettner S, Ultee KH, et al. Combina-
tion of endovascular revascularization and supervised
exercise therapy for intermittent claudication: a sys-
tematic review and meta-analysis. J Cardiovasc Surg
(Torino) . 2018;59:150 –157.
32.Fakhry F, Spronk S, van der Laan L, et al. Endo-
vascular revascularization and supervised exercise forperipheral artery disease and intermittent claudication:a randomized clinical trial. JAMA . 2015;314:1936 –
1944 .
33.Bo E, Bergland A, Stranden E, et al. Effects of 12
weeks of supervised exercise after endovasculartreatment: a randomized clinical trial. Physiother Res
Int. 2015;20:147 –157.
34.Meneses AL, Ritti-Dias RM, Parmenter B, et al.
Combined lower limb revascularisation and supervisedexercise training for patients with peripheral arterial
disease: a systematic review of randomised controlled
trials. Sports Med . 2017;47:987 –1002 .
35.Mazari FA, Khan JA, Samuel N, et al. Long-term
outcomes of a randomized clinical trial of supervisedexercise, percutaneous transluminal angioplasty orcombined treatment for patients with intermittentclaudication due to femoropopliteal disease. Br J Surg .
2017;104:76 –83.
36.Kruidenier LM, Nicolai SP, Rouwet EV, et al.
Additional supervised exercise therapy after a percu-
taneous vascular intervention for peripheral arterialdisease: a randomized clinical trial. J Vasc Interv Radiol .
2011;22:961 –968.
37.Doshi R, Shah P, Majmundar M, et al. Comparison
of supervised exercise therapy with or without revas-cularization for the management of intermittent clau-
dication: SET in PAD. Eur J Intern Med . 2021;92:131 –
133.
38.Biswas MP, Capell WH, McDermott MM, et al.
Exercise training and revascularization in theGornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042584

management of symptomatic peripheral artery dis-
ease. J Am Coll Cardiol Basic Transl Sci . 2021;6:174 –
188.
39.Mazari FA, Gulati S, Rahman MN, et al. Early out-
comes from a randomized, controlled trial of super-vised exercise, angioplasty, and combined therapy in
intermittent claudication. Ann Vasc Surg . 2010;24:69 –
79.
40.Fakhry F, Fokkenrood HJ, Spronk S, et al. Endo-
vascular revascularisation versus conservative man-agement for intermittent claudication. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev . 2018;3:CD010512 .
41.Parmenter BJ, Mavros Y, Ritti Dias R, et al. Resis-
tance training as a treatment for older persons withperipheral artery disease: a systematic review andmeta-analysis. Br J Sports Med . 2020;54:452 –461.
42.Treat-Jacobson D, Bronas U, Leon A. Ef ﬁcacy of
arm-ergometry versus treadmill exercise training to
improve walking distance in patients with claudication.Vasc Med . 2009;14:203 –213.
43.Saxton JM, Zwierska I, Blagojevic M, et al. Upper-
versus lower-limb aerobic exercise training on health-related quality of life in patients with symptomaticperipheral arterial disease. J Vasc Surg . 2011;53:1265 –
1273 .
44.Zwierska I, Walker R, Choksy S, et al. Upper- vs
lower-limb aerobic exercise rehabilitation in patients
with symptomatic peripheral arterial disease: a ran-
domized controlled trial. J Vasc Surg . 2005;42:1122 –
1130 .
45.Dipnarine K, Barak S, Martinez CA, et al. Pain-free
treadmill exercise for patients with intermittent clau-dication: are there gender differences? Vascular .
2016;24:304 –314.
46.Mika P, Konik A, Januszek R, et al. Comparison of
two treadmill training programs on walking ability andendothelial function in intermittent claudication. Int J
Cardiol . 2013;168:838 –842.
47.Buli/C19nska K, Kropielnicka K, Jasi /C19nski T, et al. Nordic
pole walking improves walking capacity in patientswith intermittent claudication: a randomized
controlled trial. Disabil Rehabil . 2016;38:1318 –1324 .
48.McDermott MM, Kibbe MR, Guralnik JM, et al.
Durability of bene ﬁts from supervised treadmill exer-
cise in people with peripheral artery disease. JA m
Heart Assoc . 2019;8:e009380 .
49.
Allen JD, Stabler T, Kenjale AA, et al. Diabetes
status differentiates endothelial function and plasmanitrite response to exercise stress in peripheral arterialdisease following supervised training. J Diabetes
Complications . 2014;28:219 –225.
50.Guidon M, McGee H. One-year effect of a super-
vised exercise programme on functional capacity andquality of life in peripheral arterial disease. Disabil
Rehabil . 2013;35:397 –404.
51.Gommans LN, Fokkenrood HJ, van Dalen HC, et al.
Safety of supervised exercise therapy in patients withintermittent claudication. J Vasc Surg . 2015;61:512 –
518.e512 .
52.Treat-Jacobson D, McDermott MM, Beckman JA,
et al. Implementation of supervised exercise therapy
for patients with symptomatic peripheral artery dis-
ease: a science advisory from the American Heart As-sociation. Circulation . 2019;140:e700 –e710 .53.Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS.
gov). Decision memo for supervised exercise therapy(SET) for symptomatic peripheral artery disease (PAD)(CAG-00449N). Medicare Coverage Database. 2017.
Accessed March 4, 2021. https://www.cms.gov/
medicare-coverage-database/view/ncacal-decision-memo.aspx?proposed ¼N&NCAId ¼287
54.Saxon JT, Sa ﬂey DM, Mena-Hurtado C, et al.
Adherence to guideline-recommended therapy-including supervised exercise therapy referral-acrossperipheral artery disease specialty clinics: insightsfrom the international PORTRAIT registry. J Am Heart
Assoc . 2020;9:e012541 .
55.Elgersma KM, Brown RJL, Salisbury DL, et al.
Adherence and exercise mode in supervised exercise
therapy for peripheral artery disease. J Vasc Nurs .
2020;38:108 –117.
56.McDermott MM, Liu K, Ferrucci L, et al. Physical
performance in peripheral arterial disease: a slowerrate of decline in patients who walk more. Ann Intern
Med. 2006;144:10 –20.
57.Collins TC, Lunos S, Carlson T, et al. Effects of a
home-based walking intervention on mobility andquality of life in people with diabetes and peripheral
arterial disease: a randomized controlled trial. Diabetes
Care. 2011;34:2174 –2179 .
58.McDermott MM, Spring B, Berger JS, et al. Effect of
a home-based exercise intervention of wearable tech-nology and telephone coaching on walking performancein peripheral artery disease. JAMA . 2018;319:1665 .
59.Walker RD, Nawaz S, Wilkinson CH, et al. In ﬂuence
of upper- and lower-limb exercise training on cardio-vascular function and walking distances in patients
with intermittent claudication. J Vasc Surg . 2000;31:
662 –669.
60.Salisbury DL, Swanson K, Brown RJ, et al. Total
body recumbent stepping vs treadmill walking in su-pervised exercise therapy: a pilot study. Vasc Med .
2022;27:150 –157.
61.Blears EE, Elias JK, Tapking C, et al. Supervised
resistance training on functional capacity, musclestrength and vascular function in peripheral arterydisease: an updated systematic review and meta-analysis. J Clin Med . 2021;10:2193 .
62.Mika P, Wilk B, Mika A, et al. The effect of pain-
free treadmill training on ﬁbrinogen, haematocrit,
and lipid pro ﬁle in patients with claudication. Eur J
Cardiovasc Prev Rehabil . 2011;18:754 –760.
63.Fakhry F, Spronk S, de Ridder M, et al. Long-term
effects of structured home-based exercise program onfunctional capacity and quality of life in patients withintermittent claudication. Arch Phys Med Rehabil .
2011;92:1066 –1073 .
64.Mays RJ, Rogers RK, Hiatt WR, et al. Community
walking programs for treatment of peripheral artery
disease. J Vasc Surg . 2013;58:1678 –1687 .
65.McDermott MM, Domanchuk K, Liu K, et al. The
Group Oriented Arterial Leg Study (GOALS) to improve
walking performance in patients with peripheral arte-rial disease. Contemp Clin Trials . 2012;33:1311 –1320 .
66.Aalami OO, Lin J, Savage D, et al. Use of an
app-based exercise therapy program includingcognitive-behavioral techniques for the managementof intermittent claudication. J Vasc Surg . 2022;76:
1651 –1656.e1 .67.Gerhard-Herman MD, Gornik HL, Barrett C, et al.
2016 AHA/ACC guideline on the management of pa-tients with lower extremity peripheral artery disease: areport of the American College of Cardiology/Amer-
ican Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice
Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2017;69:e71 –e126 .
7. Revascularization for Asymptomatic PAD
1.Peterson BG, Matsumura JS. Creative options for
large sheath access during aortic endografting. J Vasc
Interv Radiol . 2008;19:S22 –S26.
2.Ristalli F, Dini CS, Stolcova M, et al. Role of litho-
tripsy for small calci ﬁed iliacs in the era of big devices.
Curr Cardiol Rep . 2019;21:143 .
3.Vallabhaneni R, Sorial EE, Jordan WD Jr, et al. Iliac
artery recanalization of chronic occlusions to facilitate
endovascular aneurysm repair. J Vasc Surg . 2012;56:
1549 –
1554;discussion 1554 .
4.Klein AJ, Feldman DN, Aronow HD, et al. SCAI
expert consensus statement for aorto-iliac arterialintervention appropriate use. Catheter Cardiovasc
Interv . 2014;84:520 –528.
5.Feldman DN, Armstrong EJ, Aronow HD, et al. SCAI
guidelines on device selection in aorto-iliac arterialinterventions. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv . 2020;96:
915–929.
6.Kindzelski B, Mick SL, Krishnaswamy A, et al. Evo-
lution of alternative access transcatheter aortic valve
replacement. Ann Thorac Surg . 2021;112:1877 –1885 .
7.Kirker E, Korngold E, Hodson RW, et al. Transcarotid
versus subclavian/axillary access for transcatheteraortic valve replacement with SAPIEN 3. Ann Thorac
Surg. 2020;110:1892 –1897 .
8.Beurtheret S, Karam N, Resseguier N, et al. Femoral
versus nonfemoral peripheral access for transcatheteraortic valve replacement. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;74:
2728 –2739 .
9.Leng GC, Lee AJ, Fowkes FG, et al. Incidence, nat-
ural history and cardiovascular events in symptomatic
and asymptomatic peripheral arterial disease in thegeneral population. Int J Epidemiol . 1996;25:1172 –1181.
10.Dormandy J, Mahir M, Ascady G, et al. Fate of the
patient with chronic leg ischaemia. A review article.J Cardiovasc Surg (Torino) . 1989;30:50 –57.
11.Jelnes R, Gaardsting O, Hougaard Jensen K, et al.
Fate in intermittent claudication: outcome and riskfactors. Br Med J (Clin Res Ed) . 1986;293:1137 –1140 .
12.Bloor K. Natural history of arteriosclerosis of the
lower extremities: Hunterian Lecture delivered at the
Royal College of Surgeons of England on 22 April
1960. Ann R Coll Surg Engl . 1961;28:36 –52.
13.Sachs T, Pomposelli F, Hamdan A, et al. Trends in
the national outcomes and costs for claudication andlimb threatening ischemia: angioplasty vs bypass graft.J Vasc Surg . 2011;54:1021 –1031.e1 .
14.Shammas NW, Shammas GA, Dippel EJ, et al.
Predictors of distal embolization in peripheral percu-taneous interventions: a report from a large peripheralvascular registry. J Invasive Cardiol . 2009;21:628 –631.
15.Matsi PJ, Manninen HI. Complications of lower-
limb percutaneous transluminal angioplasty: a pro-
spective analysis of 410 procedures on 295 consecu-
tive patients.
Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol . 1998;21:361 –
366.JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2585

16.Hess CN, Huang Z, Patel MR, et al. Acute limb
ischemia in peripheral artery disease. Circulation .
2019;140:556 –565.
17.Keeling AN, Naughton PA, Khalidi K, et al. Should
incidental asymptomatic angiographic stenoses andocclusions be treated in patients with peripheral
arterial disease? J Vasc Interv Radiol . 2009;20:1133 –
1140 .
8. Revascularization Techniques and Registries for
Chronic Symptomatic PAD and CLTI
1.Bailey SR, Beckman JA, Dao TD, et al. ACC/AHA/
SCAI/SIR/SVM 2018 appropriate use criteria for pe-ripheral artery intervention: a report of the Amer-ican College of Cardiology Appropriate Use CriteriaTask Force, American Heart Association, Society for
Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions,
Society of Interventional Radiology, and Society forVascular Medicine. J Am Coll Cardiol .2 0 1 9 ; 7 3 : 2 1 4 –
237.
2.Feldman DN, Armstrong EJ, Aronow HD, et al. SCAI
guidelines on device selection in aorto-iliac arterialinterventions. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv . 2020;96:
915–929.
3.Woo K, Siracuse JJ, Klingbeil K, et al. Society for
Vascular Surgery appropriate use criteria for manage-
ment of intermittent claudication. J Vasc Surg .
2022;76:3 –22.e1 .
4.Society for Vascular Surgery. SVS Vascular Quality
Initiative [website]. Updated 2023. Accessed January26, 2023. https://www.vqi.org/
5.Society of Interventional Radiology. VIRTEX SIR
Data Registry [website]. Updated 2023. AccessedJanuary 26, 2023. https://www.sirweb.org/practice-
resources/quality-improvement2/data-registry/
9.1. Revascularization for Claudication
1.Bonaca MP, Bauersachs RM, Anand SS, et al. Rivar-
oxaban in peripheral artery disease after revasculari-
zation. N Engl J Med . 2020;382:1994 –2004 .
2.Schmieder GC, Richardson AI, Scott EC, et al. Out-
comes of reinterventions after subintimal angioplasty.J Vasc Surg . 2010;52:375 –382.
3.Jones DW, Schanzer A, Zhao Y, et al. Growing
impact of restenosis on the surgical treatment of pe-ripheral arterial disease. J Am Heart Assoc . 2013;2:
e000345 .
4.Bodewes TC, Soden PA, Ultee KH, et al. Risk factors
for 30-day unplanned readmission following infrain-guinal endovascular interventions. J Vasc Surg .
2017;65:484 –494.e3 .
5.Kim TI, Kiwan G, Mohamedali A, et al. Multiple
reinterventions for claudication are associated withprogression to chronic limb-threatening ischemia. Ann
Vasc Surg . 2021;72:166 –174.
6.
Makowski L, Feld J, Koppe J, et al. Sex related dif-
ferences in therapy and outcome of patients withintermittent claudication in a real-world cohort.Atherosclerosis . 2021;325:75 –82.
7.Nordanstig J, Taft C, Hensater M, et al. Improved
quality of life after 1 year with an invasive versus a
noninvasive treatment strategy in claudicants: one-
year results of the Invasive Revascularization or Notin Intermittent Claudication (IRONIC) Trial. Circulation .
2014;130:939 –947.8.Malgor RD, Alahdab F, Elraiyah TA, et al.
A systematic review of treatment of intermittentclaudication in the lower extremities. J Vasc Surg .
2015;61(Suppl 3):54S –73S.
9.Fakhry F, Spronk S, van der Laan L, et al. Endo-
vascular revascularization and supervised exercise for
peripheral artery disease and intermittent claudication:
a randomized clinical trial. JAMA . 2015;314:1936 –
1944 .
10.Vemulapalli S, Dolor RJ, Hasselblad V, et al.
Comparative effectiveness of medical therapy, super-vised exercise, and revascularization for patients withintermittent claudication: a network meta-analysis.Clin Cardiol . 2015;38:378 –386.
11.Murphy TP, Cutlip DE, Regensteiner JG, et al. Su-
pervised exercise versus primary stenting for claudi-
cation resulting from aortoiliac peripheral artery
disease: six-month outcomes from the claudication:exercise versus endoluminal revascularization(CLEVER) study. Circulation . 2012;125:130 –139.
12.Murphy TP, Cutlip DE, Regensteiner JG, et al. Su-
pervised exercise, stent revascularization, or medicaltherapy for claudication due to aortoiliac peripheralartery disease: the CLEVER study. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2015;65:999 –1009 .
13.Spronk S, Bosch JL, den Hoed PT, et al. Intermit-
tent claudication: clinical effectiveness of endovas-
cular revascularization versus supervised hospital-based exercise training —randomized controlled trial.
Radiology . 2009;250:586 –595.
14.Greenhalgh RM, Belch JJ, Brown LC, et al. The
adjuvant bene ﬁt of angioplasty in patients with mild to
moderate intermittent claudication (MIMIC) managedby supervised exercise, smoking cessation advice and
best medical therapy: results from two randomised
trials for stenotic femoropopliteal and aortoiliac arte-rial disease. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg . 2008;36:680 –
688.
15.Nylaende M, Abdelnoor M, Stranden E, et al. The
Oslo balloon angioplasty versus conservative treat-ment study (OBACT) —the 2-years results of a single
centre, prospective, randomised study in patients withintermittent claudication. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg .
2007;33:3 –12.
16.Mazari FA, Gulati S, Rahman MN, et al. Early out-
comes from a randomized, controlled trial of super-
vised exercise, angioplasty, and combined therapy inintermittent claudication. Ann Vasc Surg . 2010;24:69 –
79.
17.Mazari FA, Khan JA, Carradice D, et al. Randomized
clinical trial of percutaneous transluminal angioplasty,supervised exercise and combined treatment forintermittent claudication due to femoropopliteal
arterial disease. Br J Surg . 2012;99:39 –48.
18.Nordanstig J, Gelin J, Hensater M, et al. Walking
performance and health-related quality of life after
surgical or endovascular invasive versus non-invasivetreatment for intermittent claudication —a prospective
randomised trial. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg . 2011;42:
220 –227.
19.Whyman MR, Fowkes FG, Kerracher EM, et al.
Randomised controlled trial of percutaneous trans-luminal angioplasty for intermittent claudication. Eur J
Vasc Endovasc Surg . 1996;12:167 –172.
20.Whyman MR, Fowkes FG, Kerracher EM, et al. Is
intermittent claudication improved by percutaneoustransluminal angioplasty? A randomized controlled
trial. J Vasc Surg . 1997;26:551 –557.
21.Nordanstig J, Taft C, Hensater M, et al. Two-year
results from a randomized clinical trial of revasculari-
zation in patients with intermittent claudication. Br J
Surg. 2016;103:1290 –1299 .
22.Hobbs SD, Marshall T, Fegan C, et al. The consti-
tutive procoagulant and hypo ﬁbrinolytic state in pa-
tients with intermittent claudication due to
infrainguinal disease signi ﬁcantly improves with
percutaneous transluminal balloon angioplasty. J Vasc
Surg. 2006;43:40 –46.
23.Biswas MP, Capell WH, McDermott MM, et al. Ex-
ercise training and revascularization in the manage-
ment of symptomatic peripheral artery disease. JA m
Coll Cardiol Basic Transl Sci . 2021;6:174 –188.
24.Bo E, Hisdal J, Cvancarova M, et al. Twelve-
months follow-up of supervised exercise after percu-
taneous transluminal angioplasty for intermittent
claudication: a randomised clinical trial. Int J Environ
Res Public Health . 2013;10:5998 –6014 .
25.Fakhry F, Rouwet EV, den Hoed PT, et al. Long-
term clinical effectiveness of supervised exercise
therapy versus endovascular revascularization for
intermittent claudication from a randomized clinicaltrial. Br J Surg . 2013;100:1164
–1171.
26.Kruidenier LM, Nicolai SP, Rouwet EV, et al.
Additional supervised exercise therapy after a percu-
taneous vascular intervention for peripheral arterial
disease: a randomized clinical trial. J Vasc Interv Radiol .
2011;22:961 –968.
27.Gelin J, Jivegard L, Taft C, et al. Treatment ef ﬁcacy
of intermittent claudication by surgical intervention,
supervised physical exercise training compared to no
treatment in unselected randomised patients I: oneyear results of functional and physiological improve-ments. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg . 2001;22:107 –113.
28.Perkins JM, Collin J, Creasy TS, et al. Exercise
training versus angioplasty for stable claudication.
Long and medium term results of a prospective,randomised trial. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg . 1996;11:
409 –413.
29.Tsai TT, Rehring TF, Rogers RK, et al. The
contemporary safety and effectiveness of lower ex-
tremity bypass surgery and peripheral endovascularinterventions in the treatment of symptomatic pe-ripheral arterial disease. Circulation . 2015;132:1999 –
2011 .
30.Jones WS, Schmit KM, Vemulapalli S, et al. Treat-
ment strategies for patients with peripheral artery dis-ease. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
(US); 2013. Accessed November 23, 2020. https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23844447
31.Premaratne S, Newman J, Hobbs S, et al. Meta-
analysis of direct surgical versus endovascular revas-cularization for aortoiliac occlusive disease. J Vasc
Surg. 2020;72:726 –737.
32.Wieker CM, Schonefeld E, Osada N, et al. Results of
common femoral artery thromboendarterectomy
evaluation of a traditional surgical management in the
endovascular era. J Vasc Surg . 2016;64:995 –1001 .
33.Changal KH, Syed MA, Dar T, et al. Systematic
review and proportional meta-analysis of endarter-ectomy and endovascular therapy with routine or
selective stenting for common femoral arteryGornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042586

atherosclerotic disease. J Interv Cardiol . 2019;2019:
1593401 .
34.Mehta M, Zhou Y, Paty PS, et al. Percutaneous
common femoral artery interventions using angio-
plasty, atherectomy, and stenting. J Vasc Surg .
2016;64:369 –379.
35.Gouef ﬁc Y, Della Schiava N, Thaveau F, et al.
Stenting or surgery for de novo common femoral ar-
tery stenosis. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv . 2017;10:1344 –
1354 .
36.Nasr B, Della Schiava N, Thaveau F, et al. The
common femoral artery bifurcation lesions: clinical
outcome of simple versus complex stenting techniques
- an analysis based on the TECCO trial. Ann Vasc Surg .
2020;64:2 –10.
37.Bonvini RF, Rastan A, Sixt S, et al. Endovascular
treatment of common femoral artery disease: medium-
term outcomes of 360 consecutive procedures. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2011;58:792 –798.
38.BouﬁM, Ejargue M, Gaye M, et al. Systematic re-
view and meta-analysis of endovascular versus openrepair for common femoral artery atherosclerosis
treatment. J Vasc Surg . 2021;73:1445 –1455 .
39.Shammas NW, Shammas GA, Karia R, et al. Two-
year outcomes of endovascular interventions of thecommon femoral artery: a retrospective analysis fromtwo medical centers. Cardiovasc Revasc Med . 2021;24:
72–76.
40.Siracuse JJ, Van Orden K, Kalish JA, et al. Endo-
vascular treatment of the common femoral artery inthe Vascular Quality Initiative. J Vasc Surg . 2017;65:
1039 –1046 .
41.Baumann F, Ozdoba C, Grochenig E, et al. The
importance of patency in patients with critical limbischemia undergoing endovascular revascularizationfor infrapopliteal arterial disease. Front Cardiovasc
Med. 2014;1:17 .
42.Levin SR, Farber A, Osborne NH, et al. Tibial
bypass in patients with intermittent claudication isassociated with poor outcomes. J Vasc Surg . 2021;73:
564 –571.e1 .
43.Tetteroo E, van Engelen AD, Spithoven JH, et al.
Dutch Iliac Stent Trial Study Group. Stent placementafter iliac angioplasty: comparison of hemodynamicand angiographic criteria. Radiology . 1996;201:155 –
159.
44.
Udoff EJ, Barth KH, Harrington DP, et al. Hemo-
dynamic signi ﬁcance of iliac artery stenosis: pressure
measurements during angiography. Radiology .
1979;132:289 –293.
45.Bodewes TC, Soden PA, Ultee KH, et al. Risk fac-
tors for 30-day unplanned readmission followinginfrainguinal endovascular interventions. J Vasc Surg .
2017;65:484 –494.e3 .
46.Provance JB, Spertus JA, Decker C, et al. Assessing
patient preferences for shared decision-making in pe-ripheral artery disease. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes .
2019;12:e005730 .
47.Backman WD, Levine SA, Wenger NK, et al. Shared
decision-making for older adults with cardiovascular
disease. Clin Cardiol . 2020;43:196 –204.
48.Smolderen KG, Gosch K, Patel M, et al. PORTRAIT
(Patient-Centered Outcomes Related to Treatment
Practices in Peripheral Arterial Disease: Investigating
Trajectories): overview of design and rationale of aninternational prospective peripheral arterial diseasestudy. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes . 2018;11:
e003860 .
49.Bailey SR, Beckman JA, Dao TD, et al. ACC/AHA/
SCAI/SIR/SVM 2018 appropriate use criteria for pe-ripheral artery intervention: a report of the AmericanCollege of Cardiology Appropriate Use Criteria Task
Force, American Heart Association, Society for Car-
diovascular Angiography and Interventions, Society ofInterventional Radiology, and Society for VascularMedicine. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;73:214 –237.
50.Feldman DN, Armstrong EJ, Aronow HD, et al.
SCAI guidelines on device selection in aorto-iliacarterial interventions. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv .
2020;96:915 –929.
51.Woo K, Siracuse JJ, Klingbeil K, et al. Society for
Vascular Surgery appropriate use criteria for manage-
ment of intermittent claudication. J Vasc Surg .
2022;76:3 –22.e1 .
52.Bath J, Lawrence PF, Neal D, et al. Endovascular
interventions for claudication do not meet minimumstandards for the Society for Vascular Surgery ef ﬁcacy
guidelines. J Vasc Surg . 2021;73:1693 –1700.e3 .
53.Corriere MA, Kim GY, Byrnes ME, et al. Focus group
study of factors relevant to treatment decisions andexperiences among patients with symptomatic pe-
ripheral artery disease. J Vasc Surg . 2022;76:1316 –
1324 .
54.Smolderen KG, Pacheco C, Provance J, et al.
Treatment decisions for patients with peripheral arterydisease and symptoms of claudication: developmentprocess and alpha testing of the SHOW-ME PAD de-cision aid. Vasc Med . 2021;26:273 –
280.
55.Smolderen K. Show Me PAD [web site]. Accessed
February 25, 2022. https://showme-pad.org/
56.Fakhry F, Fokkenrood HJ, Spronk S, et al. Endo-
vascular revascularisation versus conservative man-
agement for intermittent claudication. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev . 2018;3:CD010512 .
57.Saratzis A, Paraskevopoulos I, Patel S, et al. Su-
pervised exercise therapy and revascularization forintermittent claudication: network meta-analysis ofrandomized controlled trials. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv .
2019;12:1125 –1136.
58.Antoniou GA, Chalmers N, Georgiadis GS, et al.
A meta-analysis of endovascular versus surgicalreconstruction of femoropopliteal arterial disease.
J Vasc Surg . 2013;57:242 –253.
59.Capek P, McLean GK, Berkowitz HD. Femo-
ropopliteal angioplasty. Factors in ﬂuencing long-term
success. Circulation . 1991;83(Suppl 2):I70 –I80.
60.Lofberg AM, Karacagil S, Ljungman C, et al.
Percutaneous transluminal angioplasty of the femo-ropopliteal arteries in limbs with chronic critical lowerlimb ischemia. J Vasc Surg . 2001;34:114 –121.
61.Clark TW, Groffsky JL, Soulen MC. Predictors of
long-term patency after femoropopliteal angioplasty:results from the STAR registry. J Vasc Interv Radiol .
2001;12:923 –933.
62.Johnston KW, Rae M, Hogg-Johnston SA, et al. 5-
year results of a prospective study of percutaneous
transluminal angioplasty. Ann Surg . 1987;206:403 –
413.
63.Lundgren F, Dahllof AG, Lundholm K, et al. Inter-
mittent claudication –surgical reconstruction or phys-
ical training? A prospective randomized trial oftreatment ef ﬁciency. Ann Surg . 1989;209:346 –355.64.Fleisher LA, Fleischmann KE, Auerbach AD, et al.
2014 ACC/AHA guideline on perioperative cardiovas-cular evaluation and management of patients under-going noncardiac surgery: a report of the American
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task
Force on Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2014;64:e77 –e137.
65.Siracuse JJ, Gill HL, Schneider DB, et al. Assessing
the perioperative safety of common femoral endar-terectomy in the endovascular era. Vasc Endovascular
Surg. 2014;48:27 –33.
66.Linni K, Ugurluoglu A, Hitzl W, et al. Bioabsorbable
stent implantation vs. common femoral artery endar-
terectomy: early results of a randomized trial.J Endovasc Ther . 2014;21:493 –502.
9.2. Conduit for Surgical Revascularization for
Femoropopliteal Disease
1.Klinkert P, Schepers A, Burger DH, et al. Vein versus
polytetra ﬂuoroethylene in above-knee femo-
ropopliteal bypass grafting: ﬁve-year results of a ran-
domized controlled trial. J Vasc Surg . 2003;37:149 –155.
2.Twine CP, McLain AD. Graft type for femoro-
popliteal bypass surgery. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev. 2010;2:CD001487 .
3.Pereira CE, Albers M, Romiti M, et al. Meta-analysis
of femoropopliteal bypass grafts for lower extremityarterial insuf ﬁciency. J Vasc Surg . 2006;44:510 –517.
4.Schanzer A, Hevelone N, Owens CD, et al. Technical
factors affecting autogenous vein graft failure: ob-servations from a large multicenter trial. J Vasc Surg .
2007;46:1180 –1190. discussion 1190 .
5.Farber A, Menard MT, Conte MS, et al. Surgery or
endovascular therapy for chronic limb-threateningischemia. N Engl J Med . 2022;387:2305 –2316 .
10.1. Team-Based Care for CLTI
1.Chung J, Modrall JG, Ahn C, et al. Multidisciplinary
care improves amputation-free survival in patients
with chronic critical limb ischemia. J Vasc Surg .
2015;61:162 –169.
2.Mii S, Tanaka K, Kyuragi R, et al. Aggressive wound
care by a multidisciplinary team improves woundhealing after infrainguinal bypass in patients withcritical limb ischemia. Ann Vasc Surg . 2017;41:196 –
204.
3.Kolte D, Parikh SA, Piazza G, et al. Vascular teams in
peripheral vascular disease. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;73:
2477 –2486 .
4.Hawkins BM, Li J, Wilkins LR, et al. SCAI/ACR/
APMA/SCVS/SIR/SVM/SVS/VESS position statement oncompetencies for endovascular specialists providingCLTI care. Vasc Med . 2022;27:405 –414.
5.Gerhard-Herman MD, Gornik HL, Barrett C, et al.
2016 AHA/ACC guideline on the management of pa-tients with lower extremity peripheral artery disease: a
report of the American College of Cardiology/Amer-
ican Heart Association Task Force on Clinical PracticeGuidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2017;69:e71
–e126 .
10.2. Revascularization for CLTI
1.Abu Dabrh AM, Steffen MW, Undavalli C, et al. The
natural history of untreated severe or critical limb
ischemia. J Vasc Surg . 2015;62:1642 –1651.e3 .
2.Adam DJ, Beard JD, Cleveland T, et al. Bypass
versus angioplasty in severe ischaemia of the legJACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2587

(BASIL): multicentre, randomised controlled trial.
Lancet . 2005;366:1925 –1934 .
3.Farber A, Menard MT, Conte MS, et al. Surgery or
endovascular therapy for chronic limb-threateningischemia. N Engl J Med . 2022;387:2305 –2316 .
4.Piazza M, Ricotta JJ 2nd, Bower TC, et al. Iliac artery
stenting combined with open femoral endarterectomyis as effective as open surgical reconstruction for se-vere iliac and common femoral occlusive disease.
J Vasc Surg . 2011;54:402 –411.
5.Starodubtsev V, Karpenko A, Ignatenko P. Hybrid
and open surgery of Trans-Atlantic Inter-Society II
type C and D iliac occlusive disease and concomitantlesion of common femoral artery. Int Angiol . 2016;35:
484 –491.
6.Chang RW, Goodney PP, Baek JH, et al. Long-term
results of combined common femoral endarterectomyand iliac stenting/stent grafting for occlusive disease.J Vasc Surg . 2008;48:362 –367.
7.Zavatta M, Mell MW. A national Vascular Quality
Initiative database comparison of hybrid and openrepair for aortoiliac-femoral occlusive disease. J Vasc
Surg. 2018;67:199 –205.e1 .
8.Fereydooni A, Zhou B, Xu Y, et al. Rapid increase in
hybrid surgery for the treatment of peripheral artery
disease in the Vascular Quality Initiative database.
J Vasc Surg . 2020;72:977 –986.e1 .
9.Zhou M, Huang D, Liu C, et al. Comparison of hybrid
procedure and open surgical revascularization formultilevel infrainguinal arterial occlusive disease. Clin
Interv Aging . 2014;9:1595 –1603 .
10.DeCarlo C, Boitano LT, Sumpio B, et al. Compara-
tive analysis of outcomes in patients undergoingfemoral endarterectomy plus endovascular (hybrid) orbypass for femoropopliteal occlusive disease. Ann Vasc
Surg. 2021;72:227 –236.
11.Dorigo W, Piffaretti G, Fargion A, et al.
A retrospective comparison between hybrid treatmentand prosthetic above-the-knee femoro-popliteal
bypass in the management of the obstructive disease
of the super ﬁcial femoral artery. World J Surg .
2020;44:3555 –3563 .
12.Jorshery SD, Skrip L, Sarac T, et al. Hybrid femo-
ropopliteal procedures are associated with improvedperioperative outcomes compared with bypass. J Vasc
Surg. 2018;68:1447 –1454.e5 .
13.Bradbury AW, Moakes CA, Popplewell M, et al.
A vein bypass ﬁ
rst versus a best endovascular treat-
ment ﬁrst revascularisation strategy for patients with
chronic limb threatening ischaemia who required an
infra-popliteal, with or without an additional more
proximal infra-inguinal revascularisation procedure torestore limb perfusion (BASIL-2): an open-label,randomised, multicentre, phase 3 trial. Lancet .
2023;401:1798 –1809 .
14.Almasri J, Adusumalli J, Asi N, et al. A systematic
review and meta-analysis of revascularization out-comes of infrainguinal chronic limb-threateningischemia. J Vasc Surg . 2018;68:624 –633.
15.AbuRahma AF, Robinson PA, Holt SM. Prospective
controlled study of polytetra ﬂuoroethylene versus
saphenous vein in claudicant patients with bilateral
above knee femoropopliteal bypasses. Surgery .
1999;126:594 –601; discussion 601-602 .
16.Green RM, Abbott WM, Matsumoto T, et al. Pros-
thetic above-knee femoropopliteal bypass grafting:ﬁve-year results of a randomized trial. J Vasc Surg .
2000;31:417 –425.
17.Klinkert P, Schepers A, Burger DH, et al. Vein
versus polytetra ﬂuoroethylene in above-knee femo-
ropopliteal bypass grafting: ﬁve-year results of a
randomized controlled trial. J Vasc Surg . 2003;37:149 –
155.
18.Johnson WC, Lee KK. A comparative evaluation of
polytetra ﬂuoroethylene, umbilical vein, and saphe-
nous vein bypass grafts for femoral-popliteal above-knee revascularization: a prospective randomizedDepartment of Veterans Affairs cooperative study.J Vasc Surg . 2000;32:268 –277.
19.Humbarger O, Siracuse JJ, Rybin D, et al. Broad
variation in prosthetic conduit use for femoral-popliteal bypass is not justi ﬁed on the basis of
contemporary outcomes favoring autologous greatsaphenous vein. J Vasc Surg . 2019;70:1514 –1523.e2 .
20.Bradbury AW, Adam DJ, Bell J, et al. Bypass versus
Angioplasty in Severe Ischaemia of the Leg (BASIL)trial: an intention-to-treat analysis of amputation-freeand overall survival in patients randomized to a bypasssurgery- ﬁrst or a balloon angioplasty- ﬁrst revascular-
ization strategy. J Vasc Surg . 2010;51(Suppl 5):5S –17S.
21.Nolan BW, De Martino RR, Stone DH, et al. Prior
failed ipsilateral percutaneous endovascular interven-tion in patients with critical limb ischemia predictspoor outcome after lower extremity bypass. J Vasc
Surg. 2011;54:730 –735; discussion 735-736
.
22.Santo VJ, Dargon P, Azarbal AF, et al. Lower ex-
tremity autologous vein bypass for critical limbischemia is not adversely affected by prior endovas-cular procedure. J Vasc Surg . 2014;60:129 –135.
23.Uhl C, Hock C, Betz T, et al. Pedal bypass surgery
after crural endovascular intervention. J Vasc Surg .
2014;59:1583 –1587 .
24.Suckow BD, Kraiss LW, Stone DH, et al. Compari-
son of graft patency, limb salvage, and antithrombotictherapy between prosthetic and autogenous below-knee bypass for critical limb ischemia. Ann Vasc Surg .
2013;27:1134 –1145.
25.Chang CK, Scali ST, Feezor RJ, et al. De ﬁning utility
and predicting outcome of cadaveric lower extremitybypass grafts in patients with critical limb ischemia.J Vasc Surg . 2014;60:1554 –1564 .
26.Singh K, Juneja A, Bajaj T, et al. Single tertiary care
center outcomes after lower extremity cadaveric vein
bypass for limb salvage. Vasc Endovascular Surg .
2020;54:430 –435.
27.Biancari F, Juvonen T. Angiosome-targeted lower
limb revascularization for ischemic foot wounds: sys-
tematic review and meta-analysis. Eur J Vasc Endovasc
Surg. 2014;47:517 –522.
28.Chae KJ, Shin JY. Is angiosome-targeted angio-
plasty effective for limb salvage and wound healing in
diabetic foot?: a meta-analysis. PLoS One . 2016;11:
e0159523 .
29.Bosanquet DC, Glasbey JC, Williams IM, et al.
Systematic review and meta-analysis of direct versusindirect angiosomal revascularisation of infrapopliteal
arteries. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg . 2014;48:88 –97.
30.Jongsma H, Bekken JA, Akkersdijk GP, et al. Angio-
some-directed revascularization in patients with criticallimb ischemia. J Vasc Surg . 2017;65:1208 –1219.e1 .
31.Kim KG, Meshkin DH, Tirrell AR, et al. A systematic
review and meta-analysis of endovascular angiosomalrevascularization in the setting of collateral vessels.
J Vasc Surg . 2021;74:1406 –1416.e3 .
32.Ricco JB, Gargiulo M, Stella A, et al. Impact of
angiosome- and nonangiosome-targeted peronealbypass on limb salvage and healing in patients withchronic limb-threatening ischemia. J Vasc Surg .
2017;66:1479 –1487 .
33.Dilaver N, Twine CP, Bosanquet DC. Editor
’s choice
- direct vs. indirect angiosomal revascularisation ofinfrapopliteal arteries, an updated systematic review
and meta-analysis. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg . 2018;56:
834 –848.
34.Gray BH, Laird JR, Ansel GM, et al. Complex
endovascular treatment for critical limb ischemia inpoor surgical candidates: a pilot study. J Endovasc
Ther. 2002;9:599 –604.
35.Ryer EJ, Trocciola SM, DeRubertis B, et al. Analysis
of outcomes following failed endovascular treatmentof chronic limb ischemia. Ann Vasc Surg . 2006;20:
440 –446.
36.Kim TI, Aboian E, Fischer U, et al. Lower extremity
revascularization for chronic limb-threateningischemia among patients at the extremes of age. Ann
Vasc Surg . 2021;72:517 –528.
37.Iida O, Takahara M, Soga Y, et al. Three-year out-
comes of surgical versus endovascular revasculariza-
tion for critical limb ischemia: the SPINACH study(Surgical Reconstruction Versus Peripheral Interven-tion in Patients With Critical Limb Ischemia). Circ Car-
diovasc Interv . 2017;10:e005531 .
38.Reifsnyder T, Arhuidese IJ, Hicks CW, et al.
Contemporary outcomes for open infrainguinal bypassin the endovascular era. Ann Vasc Surg . 2016;30:52 –
58.
39.Bisdas T, Torsello G, Stachmann A, et al. Results of
peripheral bypass surgery in patients with critical limb
ischemia (CRITISCH registry). Gefasschirurgie . 2016;21:
71–79.
40.Meecham L, Popplewell M, Bate G, et al.
Contemporary (2009-2014) clinical outcomes afterfemoropopliteal bypass surgery for chronic limbthreatening ischemia are inferior to those reported inthe UK Bypass versus Angioplasty for Severe Ischaemia
of the Leg (BASIL) trial (1999-2004). J Vasc Surg .
2019;69:1840 –1847 .
41.Piazza M, Ricotta JJ 2nd, Bower TC, et al. Iliac ar-
tery stenting combined with open femoral endarter-ectomy is as effective as open surgical reconstructionfor severe iliac and common femoral occlusive disease.J Vasc Surg . 2011;54:402 –411.
42.Zavatta M, Mell MW. A national vascular quality
Initiative database comparison of hybrid and open
repair for aortoiliac-femoral occlusive disease. J Vasc
Surg. 2018;67:199 –205.e1 .
43.Fereydooni A, Zhou B, Xu Y, et al. Rapid increase in
hybrid surgery for the treatment of peripheral arterydisease in the Vascular Quality Initiative database.J Vasc Surg . 2020;72:977 –986.e1 .
44.Jorshery SD, Skrip L, Sarac T, et al. Hybrid femo-
ropopliteal procedures are associated with improvedperioperative outcomes compared with bypass. J Vasc
Surg. 2018;68:1447 –1454.e5 .
45.Zamor KC, Hoel AW, Helenowski IB, et al. Com-
parison of direct and less invasive techniques for the
treatment of severe aorto-iliac occlusive disease. Ann
Vasc Surg . 2018;46:226 –233.Gornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042588

46.Eugster T, Stierli P, Guerke L, et al. Present status
of infrainguinal arterial bypass procedures followingan all autogenous policy —long-term results of a single
center. Swiss Surg . 2002;8:171 –175.
47.McGinigle KL, Pascarella L, Shortell CK, et al.
Spliced arm vein grafts are a durable conduit for lowerextremity bypass. Ann Vasc Surg . 2015;29:716 –721.
48.Nierlich P, Enzmann FK, Metzger P, et al. Arm vein
versus small saphenous vein for lower extremitybypass in the absence of both great saphenous veins.Ann Vasc Surg . 2021;70:341 –348.
49.Chew DK, Conte MS, Donaldson MC, et al.
Autogenous composite vein bypass graft for infrain-guinal arterial reconstruction. J Vasc Surg . 2001;33:
259–264; discussion 264-265 .
50.Belkin M, Conte MS, Donaldson MC, et al.
Preferred strategies for secondary infrainguinalbypass: lessons learned from 300 consecutive reop-erations. J Vasc Surg . 1995;21:282 –293; discussion
293-295 .
51.Schanzer A, Hevelone N, Owens CD, et al. Technical
factors affecting autogenous vein graft failure: ob-servations from a large multicenter trial. J Vasc Surg .
2007;46:1180 –1190; discussion 1190 .
52.Panneton JM, Hollier LH, Hofer JM. Multicenter
randomized prospective trial comparing a pre-cuffedpolytetra ﬂuoroethylene graft to a vein cuffed poly-
tetraﬂuoroethylene graft for infragenicular arterial
bypass. Ann Vasc Surg . 2004;18:199 –206.
53.Conte MS, Bradbury AW, Kolh P, et al. Global
vascular guidelines on the management of chroniclimb-threatening ischemia. J Vasc Surg . 2019;69:3S –
125S.e140 .
54.Twine CP, McLain AD. Graft type for femoro-
popliteal bypass surgery. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev. 2010;2:CD001487 .
55.Pereira CE, Albers M, Romiti M, et al. Meta-analysis
of femoropopliteal bypass grafts for lower extremityarterial insuf ﬁciency. J Vasc Surg . 2006;44:510 –517.
56.SCAMICOS. PTFE bypass to below-knee arteries:
distal vein collar or not? A prospective randomisedmulticentre study. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg . 2010;39:
747–754.
57.Laurila K, Lepantalo M, Teittinen K, et al. Does an
adjuvant AV- ﬁstula improve the patency of a femo-
rocrural PTFE bypass with distal vein cuff in critical legischaemia? a prospective randomised multicentre trial.Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg . 2004;27:180 –185.
58.Azuma N, Uchida H, Kokubo T, et al. Factors
inﬂuencing wound healing of critical ischaemic foot
after bypass surgery: is the angiosome important inselecting bypass target artery? Eur J Vasc Endovasc
Surg. 2012;43:322 –328.
59.Sumpio BE, Forsythe RO, Ziegler KR, et al. Clinical
implications of the angiosome model in peripheralvascular disease. J Vasc Surg . 2013;58:814 –826.
60.Iida O, Nanto S, Uematsu M, et al. Importance of
the angiosome concept for endovascular therapy inpatients with critical limb ischemia. Catheter Car-
diovasc Interv . 2010;75:830 –836.
61.Kret MR, Cheng D, Azarbal AF, et al. Utility of
direct angiosome revascularization and runoff scores inpredicting outcomes in patients undergoingrevascularization for critical limb ischemia. J Vasc Surg .
2014;59:121 –128.
62.Zheng XT, Zeng RC, Huang JY, et al. The use of the
angiosome concept for treating infrapopliteal criticallimb ischemia through interventional therapy anddetermining the clinical signi ﬁcance of collateral ves-
sels. Ann Vasc Surg . 2016;32:41 –49.
10.3.1. Pressure Of ﬂoading for CLTI
1.Armstrong DG, Lavery LA, Wu S, et al. Evaluation of
removable and irremovable cast walkers in the healingof diabetic foot wounds: a randomized controlled trial.Diabetes Care . 2005;28:551 –554.
2.Morona JK, Buckley ES, Jones S, et al. Comparison
of the clinical effectiveness of different off-loadingdevices for the treatment of neuropathic foot ulcersin patients with diabetes: a systematic review andmeta-analysis. Diabetes Metab Res Rev . 2013;29:183 –
193.
3.Bus SA, van Deursen RW, Armstrong DG, et al.
Footwear and of ﬂoading interventions to prevent and
heal foot ulcers and reduce plantar pressure in patientswith diabetes: a systematic review. Diabetes Metab Res
Rev. 2016;32(Suppl 1):99 –118.
4.Caravaggi C, Faglia E, De Giglio R, et al. Effective-
ness and safety of a nonremovable ﬁberglass off-
bearing cast versus a therapeutic shoe in the treat-ment of neuropathic foot ulcers: a randomized study.
Diabetes Care . 2000;23:1746 –1751.
5.Katz IA, Harlan A, Miranda-Palma B, et al.
A randomized trial of two irremovable off-loadingdevices in the management of plantar neuropathic
diabetic foot ulcers. Diabetes Care . 2005;28:555 –559.
6.de Oliveira AL, Moore Z. Treatment of the diabetic
foot by of ﬂoading: a systematic review. J Wound Care .
2015;24(560):562 –570.
7.Health Quality Ontario. Fibreglass total contact
casting, removable cast walkers, and irremovable castwalkers to treat diabetic neuropathic foot ulcers: ahealth technology assessment. Ont Health Technol
Assess Ser . 2017;17:1 –124.
8.Elraiyah T, Prutsky G, Domecq JP, et al.
A systematic review and meta-analysis of off-loadingmethods for diabetic foot ulcers. J Vasc Surg .
2016;63:59S –68S. e1-2 .
9.Lewis J, Lipp A. Pressure-relieving interventions for
treating diabetic foot ulcers. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev. 2013:CD002302 .
10.Ulbrecht JS, Hurley T, Mauger DT, et al. Prevention
of recurrent foot ulcers with plantar pressure-based
in-shoe orthoses: the CareFUL prevention multicenter
randomized controlled trial. Diabetes Care . 2014;37:
1982 –1989 .
11.Bus SA, Waaijman R, Arts M, et al. Effect of custom-
made footwear on foot ulcer recurrence in diabetes: a
multicenter randomized controlled trial. Diabetes Care .
2013;36:4109 –4116 .
12.Armstrong DG, Nguyen HC, Lavery LA, et al. Off-
loading the diabetic foot wound: a randomized clinical
trial. Diabetes Care . 2001;24:1019 –1022 .
13.Schaper NC, van Netten JJ, Apelqvist J, et al.
Practical guidelines on the prevention andmanagement of diabetic foot disease (IWGDF 2019
update). Diabetes Metab Res Rev . 2020;36(Suppl 1):
e3266 .
10.3.2. Wound Care and Management of Infection
for CLTI
1.Garcia-Morales E, Lázaro-Martínez JL, Aragón-
Sánchez J, et al. Surgical complications associated withprimary closure in patients with diabetic foot osteo-myelitis. Diabet Foot Ankle . 2012;3. https://doi.org/10.
3402/dfa.v3i0.19000
2.Berceli SA, Brown JE, Irwin PB, et al. Clinical out-
comes after closed, staged, and open forefoot ampu-tations. J Vasc Surg . 2006;44:347 –351; discussion 352 .
3.Shaikh N, Vaughan P, Varty K, et al. Outcome of
limited forefoot amputation with primary closure in
patients with diabetes. Bone Joint J . 2013;95-B:1083 –
1087 .
4.Armstrong DG, Lavery LA. Diabetic Foot Study
Consortium. Negative pressure wound therapy after
partial diabetic foot amputation: a multicentre, rand-
omised controlled trial. Lancet . 2005;366:1704 –1710 .
5.Sepulveda G, Espindola M, Maureira M, et al.
[Negative-pressure wound therapy versus standardwound dressing in the treatment of diabetic foot
amputation. A randomised controlled trial]. Cir Esp .
2009;86:171 –177.
6.Kobayashi N, Hirano K, Nakano M, et al. Prognosis
of critical limb ischemia patients with tissue loss afterachievement of complete wound healing by endovas-
cular therapy. J Vasc Surg . 2015;61:951 –959.
7.Saap LJ, Falanga V. Debridement performance index
and its correlation with complete closure of diabeticfoot ulcers. Wound Repair Regen . 2002;10:354 –359.
8.Liu Z, Dumville JC, Hinchliffe RJ, et al. Negative
pressure wound therapy for treating foot wounds inpeople with diabetes mellitus. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev. 2018;10:CD010318 .
9.Noble-Bell G, Forbes A. A systematic review of the
effectiveness of negative pressure wound therapy in
the management of diabetes foot ulcers. Int Wound J .
2008;5:233 –242.
10.Seidel D, Storck M, Lawall H, et al. Negative
pressure wound therapy compared with standard
moist wound care on diabetic foot ulcers in real-life
clinical practice: results of the German DiaFu-RCT.BMJ Open . 2020;10:e026345 .
11.Abidia A, Laden G, Kuhan G, et al. The role of hy-
perbaric oxygen therapy in ischaemic diabetic lower
extremity ulcers: a double-blind randomised-
controlled trial. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg . 2003;25:
513–518.
12.Faglia E, Favales F, Aldeghi A, et al. Adjunctive
systemic hyperbaric oxygen therapy in treatment of
severe prevalently ischemic diabetic foot ulcer. A
randomized study. Diabetes Care . 1996;19:1338 –1343 .
13.Margolis DJ, Gupta J, Hoffstad O, et al. Lack of
effectiveness of hyperbaric oxygen therapy for thetreatment of diabetic foot ulcer and the prevention of
amputation: a cohort study. Diabetes Care . 2013;36:
1961 –1966 .
14.Sharma R, Sharma SK, Mudgal SK, et al. Ef ﬁcacy of
hyperbaric oxygen therapy for diabetic foot ulcer, aJACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2589

systematic review and meta-analysis of controlled
clinical trials. Sci Rep . 2021;11:2189 .
15.Whisstock C, Volpe A, Ninkovic S, et al. Multidis-
ciplinary approach for the management and treatment
of diabetic foot infections with a resorbable,gentamicin-loaded bone graft substitute. J Clin Med .
2020;9:3586 .
16.Aysert Yildiz P, Ozdil T, Dizbay M, et al. Peripheral
arterial disease increases the risk of multidrug-
resistant bacteria and amputation in diabetic foot in-
fections. Turk J Med Sci . 2018;48:845 –850.
17.Boulton AJM, Armstrong DG, Hardman MJ, et al.
Diagnosis and management of diabetic foot infections .
American Diabetes Association; 2020. Accessed
November 19, 2020. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/32105420
18.Lipsky BA, Senneville E, Abbas ZG, et al. Guidelines
on the diagnosis and treatment of foot infection inpersons with diabetes (IWGDF 2019 update). Diabetes
Metab Res Rev . 2020;36(Suppl 1):e3280 .
19.Strohal R, Dissemond J, Jordan O ’Brien J, et al.
EWMA document: debridement. An updated overviewand clari ﬁcation of the principle role of debridement.
J Wound Care . 2013;22:5 .
20.Han G, Ceilley R. Chronic wound healing: a review
of current management and treatments. Adv Ther .
2017;34:599 –610.
21.International Wound Infection Institute. Wound
infection in clinical practice . Wounds International; 2022.
https://www.woundsinternati onal.com/resources/details/
wound-infection-in-clinical-practice-principles-of-best-
practice
10.3.3. Approach to the “No Option ”Patient With
CLTI
1.Vitale V, Monami M, Mannucci E. Prostanoids in
patients with peripheral arterial disease: a meta-
analysis of placebo-controlled randomized clinical tri-
als.J Diabetes Complications . 2016;30:161 –166.
2.Vietto V, Franco JV, Saenz V, et al. Prostanoids for
critical limb ischaemia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev .
2018;1:CD006544 .
3.Meini S, Dentali F, Melillo E, et al. Prostanoids for
critical limb ischemia: a clinical review and consider-ation of current guideline recommendations. Angiol-
ogy. 2020;71:226 –234.
4.Moran PS, Teljeur C, Harrington P, et al.
A systematic review of intermittent pneumatic
compression for critical limb ischaemia. Vasc Med .
2015;20:41 –50.
5.Labropoulos NLLJ, Bhatti A, et al. Hemodynamic
effects of intermittent pneumatic compression in pa-
tients with critical limb ischemia. Vasc Surg . 2005;42:
710–716.
6.Zaki M, Elsherif M, Taw ﬁck W, et al. The role of
sequential pneumatic compression in limb salvage innon-reconstructable critical limb ischemia. Eur J Vasc
Endovasc Surg . 2016;51:565 –571.
7.Williams KJ, Babber A, Ravikumar R, et al. Non-
invasive management of peripheral arterial disease.Adv Exp Med Biol . 2017;906:387 –406.
8.Schreve MA, Vos CG, Vahl AC, et al. Venous arteri-
alisation for salvage of critically ischaemic limbs: asystematic review and meta-analysis. Eur J Vasc
Endovasc Surg . 2017;53:387 –402.
9.Schmidt A, Schreve MA, Huizing E, et al. Midterm
outcomes of percutaneous deep venous arterializationwith a dedicated system for patients with no-optionchronic limb-threatening ischemia: the ALPS multi-center study. J Endovasc Ther . 2020;27:658 –665.
10.Ho VT, Gologorsky R, Kibrik P, et al. Open, percu-
taneous, and hybrid deep venous arterialization tech-nique for no-option foot salvage. J Vasc Surg . 2020;71:
2152 –2160 .
11.Mustapha JA, Saab FA, Clair D, et al. Interim results
of the PROMISE I trial to investigate the LimFlowsystem of percutaneous deep vein arterialization forthe treatment of critical limb ischemia. J Invasive
Cardiol . 2019;31:57 –63.
12.Clair DG, Mustapha JA, Shishehbor MH, et al.
PROMISE I: early feasibility study of the LimFlowSystem for percutaneous deep vein arterialization inno-option chronic limb-threatening ischemia: 12-month results. J Vasc Surg . 2021;74:1626 –1635 .
13.Kim TI, Vartanian SS, Schneider PA. A review and
proposed classi ﬁcation system for the no-option pa-
tient with chronic limb-threatening ischemia.J Endovasc Ther . 2021;28:183 –193.
14.Sen I, Agarwal S, Tharyan P, et al. Lumbar sym-
pathectomy versus prostanoids for critical limbischaemia due to non-reconstructable peripheralarterial disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2018;4:
CD009366 .
15.Laoire AN, Murtagh FEM. Systematic review of
pharmacological therapies for the management ofischaemic pain in patients with non-reconstructablecritical limb ischaemia. BMJ Support Palliat Care .
2018;8:400 –410.
16.Chahal A, Malla S, Sharma S, et al. CT-guided
lumbar sympathectomy as a last option for chroniclimb-threatening ischemia of the lower limbs: evalua-
tion of technical factors and long-term outcomes. AJR
Am J Roentgenol . 2021;216:1273 –1282 .
17.Mills JL Sr, Conte MS, Armstrong DG, et al. The
Society for Vascular Surgery Lower Extremity Threat-
ened Limb Classi ﬁcation System: risk strati ﬁcation
based on wound, ischemia, and foot infection (WIfI).J Vasc Surg . 2014;59:220 –234.e1-2 .
18.Conte MS, Bradbury AW, Kolh P, et al. Global
vascular guidelines on the management of chronic
limb-threatening ischemia. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg .
2019;58(Suppl 1):S1 –S109.e33 .
10.3.4. Amputation for CLTI
1.Vartanian SM, Robinson KD, O ﬁli K, et al. Outcomes
of neuroischemic wounds treated by a multidisci-plinary amputation prevention service. Ann Vasc Surg .
2015;29:534 –542.
2.Chung J, Modrall JG, Ahn C, et al. Multidisciplinary
care improves amputation-free survival in patientswith chronic critical limb ischemia. J Vasc Surg .
2015;61:162 –169.
3.Armstrong DG, Bharara M, White M, et al. The
impact and outcomes of establishing an integratedinterdisciplinary surgical team to care for the diabeticfoot. Diabetes Metab Res Rev . 2012;28:514 –518.
4.Armstrong EJ, Alam S, Henao S, et al. Multidisci-
plinary care for critical limb ischemia: current gaps andopportunities for improvement. J Endovasc Ther .
2019;26:199 –212.
5.Flores AM, Mell MW, Dalman RL, et al. Bene ﬁto f
multidisciplinary wound care center on the volume and
outcomes of a vascular surgery practice. J Vasc Surg .
2019;70:1612 –1619 .
6.Conte MS, Bradbury AW, Kolh P, et al. Global
vascular guidelines on the management of chronic
limb-threatening ischemia. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg .
2019;58(Suppl 1):S1 –S109.e33 .
7.Bosma J, Vahl A, Wisselink W. Systematic review
on health-related quality of life after revasculari-
zation and primary amputation in patients with
critical limb ischemia. Ann Vasc Surg .2 0 1 3 ; 2 7 :
1105 –1114.
8.Creager MA, Matsushita K, Arya S, et al. Reducing
nontraumatic lower-extremity amputations by 20% by2030: time to get to our feet: a policy statement from
the American Heart Association. Circulation . 2021;143:
e875 –e891 .
9.Suckow BD, Goodney PP, Nolan BW, et al. Domains
that determine quality of life in vascular amputees.Ann Vasc Surg . 2015;29:722 –730.
10.Davie-Smith F, Coulter E, Kennon B, et al. Factors
inﬂuencing quality of life following lower limb ampu-
tation for peripheral arterial occlusive disease: a sys-tematic review of the literature. Prosthet Orthot Int .
2017;41:537 –547.
11.Remes L, Isoaho R, Vahlberg T, et al. Quality of life
three years after major lower extremity amputationdue to peripheral arterial disease. Aging Clin Exp Res .
2010;22:395 –405.
12.Pell JP, Donnan PT, Fowkes FG, et al. Quality of life
following lower limb amputation for peripheral arterialdisease. Eur J Vasc Surg . 1993;7:448 –451.
13.Curran T, Zhang JQ, Lo RC, et al. Risk factors and
indications for readmission after lower extremity
amputation in the American College of Surgeons Na-
tional Surgical Quality Improvement Program. J Vasc
Surg. 2014;60:1315 –1324 .
14.Phair J, DeCarlo C, Scher L, et al. Risk factors for
unplanned readmission and stump complications aftermajor lower extremity amputation. J Vasc Surg .
2018;67:848 –856.
15.Elgzyri T, Larsson J, Thorne J, et al. Outcome of
ischemic foot ulcer in diabetic patients who had noinvasive vascular intervention. Eur J Vasc Endovasc
Surg. 2013;46:110 –117.
16.Mills JL Sr, Conte MS, Armstrong DG, et al. The
Society for Vascular Surgery Lower Extremity Threat-ened Limb Classi ﬁcation System: risk strati ﬁcation
based on wound, ischemia, and foot infection (WIfI).J Vasc Surg . 2014;59:220 –234.e1-2 .
17.Vogel TR, Smith JB, Kruse RL. Risk factors for
thirty-day readmissions after lower extremity ampu-tation in patients with vascular disease. PM R . 2018;10:
1321
–1329 .
18.Marston WA, Davies SW, Armstrong B, et al. Nat-
ural history of limbs with arterial insuf ﬁciency and
chronic ulceration treated without revascularization.J Vasc Surg . 2006;44:108 –114.
19.Cull DL, Manos G, Hartley MC, et al. An early
validation of the Society for Vascular Surgery lowerGornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042590

extremity threatened limb classi ﬁcation system. J Vasc
Surg. 2014;60:1535 –1541.
20.Beaulieu RJ, Grimm JC, Lyu H, et al. Rates and
predictors of readmission after minor lower extremityamputations. J Vasc Surg . 2015;62:101 –105.
21.Schweinberger MH, Roukis TS. Soft-tissue and
osseous techniques to balance forefoot and midfoot
amputations. Clin Podiatr Med Surg . 2008;25:623 –
639, viii-ix .
22.Mueller MJ, Sinacore DR, Hastings MK, et al. Effect
of Achilles tendon lengthening on neuropathic plantarulcers. A randomized clinical trial. J Bone Joint Surg
Am. 2003;85:1436 –1445 .
23.Holstein P, Lohmann M, Bitsch M, et al. Achilles
tendon lengthening, the panacea for plantar forefootulceration? Diabetes Metab Res Rev . 2004;20(Suppl 1):
S37–S40.
24.Armstrong DG, Stacpoole-Shea S, Nguyen H, et al.
Lengthening of the Achilles tendon in diabetic patients
who are at high risk for ulceration of the foot. J Bone
Joint Surg Am . 1999;81:535 –538.
25.Lin SS, Lee TH, Wapner KL. Plantar forefoot ul-
ceration with equinus deformity of the ankle in dia-betic patients: the effect of tendo-Achilleslengthening and total contact casting. Orthopedics .
1996;19:465 –475.
26.Robinson WP, Loretz L, Hanesian C, et al. Society
for Vascular Surgery Wound, Ischemia, foot Infection
(WIfI) score correlates with the intensity of multimodal
limb treatment and patient-centered outcomes in pa-tients with threatened limbs managed in a limb pres-ervation center. J Vasc Surg . 2017;66:488 –498.e2 .
27.Darling JD, McCallum JC, Soden PA, et al. Predic-
tive ability of the Society for Vascular Surgery Wound,Ischemia, and foot Infection (WIfI) classi ﬁcation sys-
tem following infrapopliteal endovascular in-
terventions for critical limb ischemia. J Vasc Surg .
2016;64:616 –622.
28.Zhan LX, Branco BC, Armstrong DG, et al. The
Society for Vascular Surgery lower extremity threat-ened limb classi ﬁcation system based on Wound,
Ischemia, and foot Infection (WIfI) correlates with riskof major amputation and time to wound healing. J Vasc
Surg. 2015;61:939 –944.
29.Mills EJ, Thorlund K, Eapen S, et al. Cardiovascular
events associated with smoking cessation pharmaco-
therapies: a network meta-analysis. Circulation .
2014;129:28 –41.
30.Conte MS, Bradbury AW, Kolh P, et al. Global
vascular guidelines on the management of chroniclimb-threatening ischemia. J Vasc Surg . 2019;69:3S –
125S.e140 .
31.Society for Vascular Surgery. SVS Vascular Quality
Initiative [website]. Updated 2023. Accessed January26, 2023. https://www.vqi.org/
32.Society of Interventional Radiology. VIRTEX SIR
Data Registry [website]. Updated 2023. AccessedJanuary 26, 2023. https://www.sirweb.org/practice-
resources/quality-improvement2/data-registry/
33.STS National Database. The Society of Thoracic
Surgeons. Accessed January 13, 2022. https://www.
sts.org/registries/sts-national-database
34.National Cardiovascular Data Registry (NCDR /C226)
Registries. American College of Cardiology. Accessed
January 13, 2022. https://cvquality.acc.org/NCDR-
Home/registries35.McNamara CT, Iorio ML. Targeted muscle reinner-
vation: outcomes in treating chronic pain secondary toextremity amputation and phantom limb syndrome.J Reconstr Microsurg . 2020;36:235 –240.
11. Acute Limb Ischemia
1.Creager MA, Belkin M, Bluth EI, et al. 2012 ACCF/
AHA/ACR/SCAI/SIR/STS/SVM/SVN/SVS key data ele-
ments and de ﬁnitions for peripheral atherosclerotic
vascular disease: a report of the American College ofCardiology Foundation/American Heart AssociationTask Force on Clinical Data Standards (Writing Com-mittee to Develop Clinical Data Standards for Periph-
eral Atherosclerotic Vascular Disease). J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2012;59:294 –357.
2.Rutherford RB, Baker JD, Ernst C, et al. Recom-
mended standards for reports dealing with lower ex-
tremity ischemia: revised version. J Vasc Surg .
1997;26:517 –538.
11.1. Initial Clinical Evaluation and Diagnostic
Approach to ALI
1.Baril DT, Patel VI, Judelson DR, et al. Outcomes of
lower extremity bypass performed for acute limbischemia. J Vasc Surg . 2013;58:949 –956.
2.Londero LS, Norgaard B, Houlind K. Patient delay is
the main cause of treatment delay in acute limbischemia: an investigation of pre- and in-hospital timedelay. World J Emerg Surg . 2014;9:56 .
3.Duval S, Keo HH, Oldenburg NC, et al. The impact of
prolonged lower limb ischemia on amputation, mor-
tality, and functional status: the FRIENDS registry. Am
Heart J . 2014;168:577 –587.
4.Morris-Stiff G, D ’Souza J, Raman S, et al. Update
experience of surgery for acute limb ischaemia in a
district general hospital
–are we getting any better?
Ann R Coll Surg Engl . 2009;91:637 –640.
5.Blaisdell FW. The pathophysiology of skeletal
muscle ischemia and the reperfusion syndrome: a re-view. Cardiovasc Surg . 2002;10:620 –630.
6.Rutherford RB, Baker JD, Ernst C, et al. Recom-
mended standards for reports dealing with lower ex-tremity ischemia: revised version. J Vasc Surg .
1997;26:517 –538.
7.Saarinen E, Vuorisalo S, Kauhanen P, et al. The
beneﬁt of revascularization in nonagenarians with
lower limb ischemia is limited by high mortality. Eur J
Vasc Endovasc Surg . 2015;49:420 –425.
11.2.1. Revascularization for ALI
1.Comerota AJ, Weaver FA, Hosking JD, et al. Results
of a prospective, randomized trial of surgery versusthrombolysis for occluded lower extremity bypassgrafts. Am J Surg . 1996;172:105 –112.
2.Difﬁn DC, Kandarpa K. Assessment of peripheral
intraarterial thrombolysis versus surgical revasculari-zation in acute lower-limb ischemia: a review of limb-salvage and mortality statistics. J Vasc Interv Radiol .
1996;7:57 –63.
3.Ouriel K, Veith FJ, Sasahara AA. A comparison of
recombinant urokinase with vascular surgery as initial
treatment for acute arterial occlusion of the legs.
Thrombolysis or Peripheral Arterial Surgery (TOPAS)Investigators. N Engl J Med . 1998;338:1105 –1111.
4.The STILE Investigators. Results of a prospective
randomized trial evaluating surgery versusthrombolysis for ischemia of the lower extremity. The
STILE trial. Ann Surg . 1994;220:251 –266. discussion
266-268 .
5.Ouriel K, Shortell CK, DeWeese JA, et al.
A comparison of thrombolytic therapy with operativerevascularization in the initial treatment of acute pe-ripheral arterial ischemia. J Vasc Surg . 1994;19:
1021 –1030 .
6.Sanchez JB, Cuipal Alcalde JD, Ramos Isidro R, et al.
Acute limb ischemia in a Peruvian cohort infected byCOVID-19. Ann Vasc Surg . 2021;72:196 –204.
7.Ilonzo N, Kumar S, Borazan N, et al. Endotheliitis in
coronavirus disease 2019-positive patients after ex-
tremity amputation for acute thrombotic events. Ann
Vasc Surg . 2021;72:209
–215.
8.Valerio S, Bracale UM, Giribono AM, et al. Acute
lower limb ischemia complicating pemetrexed andcarboplatin combination chemotherapy for malignantpleural mesothelioma. Ann Ital Chir . 2014;85(ePub).
S2239253X14023019 .
9.Le Ho H, Vauleon E, Boucher E, et al. Acute ischemia
of the lower limb during chemotherapy for testicularcancer: a report of two cases. Acta Oncol . 2009;48:
940 –942.
10.Dieckmann KP, Gehrckens R. Thrombosis of
abdominal aorta during cisplatin-based chemotherapyof testicular seminoma - a case report. BMC Cancer .
2009;9:459 .
11.Campia U. Vascular effects of cancer treatments.
Vasc Med . 2020;25:226 –234.
12.Wu MD, Moslehi JJ, Lindner JR. Arterial thrombotic
complications of tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Arterioscler
Thromb Vasc Biol . 2021;41:3 –10.
13.Attisani L, Pucci A, Luoni G, et al. COVID-19 and
acute limb ischemia: a systematic review. J Cardiovasc
Surg (Torino) . 2021;62:542 –547.
14.Bellosta R, Luzzani L, Natalini G, et al. Acute limb
ischemia in patients with COVID-19 pneumonia. J Vasc
Surg. 2020;72:1864 –1872 .
15.de Donato G, Pasqui E, Setacci F, et al. Acute on
chronic limb ischemia: from surgical embolectomy andthrombolysis to endovascular options. Semin Vasc
Surg. 2018;31:66 –75.
16.Ansel GM, Botti CF Jr, Silver MJ. Treatment of
acute limb ischemia with a percutaneous mechanicalthrombectomy-based endovascular approach: 5-yearlimb salvage and survival results from a single center
series. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv . 2008;72:325 –330.
17.Leung DA, Blitz LR, Nelson T, et al. Rheolytic
pharmacomechanical thrombectomy for the manage-ment of acute limb ischemia: results from the PEARLregistry. J Endovasc Ther . 2015;22:546 –557.
18.Baumann F, Sharpe E 3rd, Pena C, et al. Technical
results of vacuum-assisted thrombectomy for arterialclot removal in patients with acute limb ischemia.J Vasc Interv Radiol . 2016;27:330 –335.
19.Schrijver AM, van Leersum M, Fioole B, et al. Dutch
randomized trial comparing standard catheter-directed thrombolysis and ultrasound-acceleratedthrombolysis for arterial thromboembolic infraingui-nal disease (DUET). J Endovasc Ther . 2015;22:87 –95.
20.Gupta R, Hennebry TA. Percutaneous isolated
pharmaco-mechanical thrombolysis-thrombectomy
system for the management of acute arterial limbJACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2591

ischemia: 30-day results from a single-center experi-
ence. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv . 2012;80:636 –643.
21.Panetta T, Thompson JE, Talkington CM, et al.
Arterial embolectomy: a 34-year experience with 400cases. Surg Clin North Am . 1986;66:339 –353.
22.Tawes RL Jr, Harris EJ, Brown WH, et al. Arterial
thromboembolism. A 20-year perspective. Arch Surg .
1985;120:595 –599.
23.Eliason JL, Wainess RM, Proctor MC, et al.
A national and single institutional experience in thecontemporary treatment of acute lower extremityischemia. Ann Surg . 2003;238:382 –389; discussion
389-390 .
24.Baril DT, Ghosh K, Rosen AB. Trends in the inci-
dence, treatment, and outcomes of acute lower ex-
tremity ischemia in the United States Medicarepopulation. J Vasc Surg . 2014;60:669 –677.e2 .
25.Cambria RP, Abbott WM. Acute arterial thrombosis
of the lower extremity. Its natural history contrastedwith arterial embolism. Arch Surg . 1984;119:784 –787.
26.Veenstra EB, van der Laan MJ, Zeebregts CJ, et al.
A systematic review and meta-analysis of endovascularand surgical revascularization techniques in acute limbischemia. J Vasc Surg . 2020;71:654 –668.e653 .
27.Darwood R, Berridge DC, Kessel DO, et al. Surgery
versus thrombolysis for initial management of acute
limb ischaemia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2018;8:
CD002784 .
28.Kolte D, Kennedy KF, Shishehbor MH, et al.
Endovascular versus surgical revascularization foracute limb ischemia: a propensity-score matchedanalysis. Circ Cardiovasc Interv . 2020;13:e008150 .
29.Grip O, Wanhainen A, Michaelsson K, et al. Open or
endovascular revascularization in the treatment ofacute lower limb ischaemia. Br J Surg . 2018;105:1598 –
1606 .
30.Schrijver AM, Reijnen MM, van Oostayen JA, et al.
Initial results of catheter-directed ultrasound-accel-
erated thrombolysis for thromboembolic obstructionsof the aortofemoral arteries: a feasibility study. Car-
diovasc Intervent Radiol . 2012;35:279 –285.
31.Schrijver A, Vos J, Hoksbergen AW, et al. Ultra-
sound-accelerated thrombolysis for lower extremityischemia: multicenter experience and literature review.J Cardiovasc Surg (Torino) . 2011;52:467 –476.
32.Schrijver AM, Reijnen MM, van Oostayen JA,
et al. Dutch randomized trial comparing standardcatheter-directed thrombolysis versus ultrasound-accelerated thrombolysis for thromboembolicinfrainguinal disease (DUET): design and rationale.Trials . 2011;12:20
.
33.Spence LD, Hartnell GG, Reinking G, et al.
Thrombolysis of infrapopliteal bypass grafts: ef ﬁcacy
and underlying angiographic pathology. AJR Am J
Roentgenol . 1997;169:717 –721.
34.Nackman GB, Walsh DB, Fillinger MF, et al.
Thrombolysis of occluded infrainguinal vein grafts:predictors of outcome. J Vasc Surg . 1997;25:1023 –
1031; discussion 1031-1032 .
35.Durham JD, Geller SC, Abbott WM, et al. Regional
infusion of urokinase into occluded lower-extremity
bypass grafts: long-term clinical results. Radiology .
1989;172:83 –87.
36.Koltun WA, Gardiner GA Jr, Harrington DP, et al.
Thrombolysis in the treatment of peripheral arterialvascular occlusions. Arch Surg . 1987;122:901 –905.37.Sicard GA, Schier JJ, Totty WG, et al. Thrombolytic
therapy for acute arterial occlusion. J Vasc Surg .
1985;2:65 –78.
38.McNamara TO, Bomberger RA. Factors affecting
initial and 6 month patency rates after intraarterial
thrombolysis with high dose urokinase. Am J Surg .
1986;152:709 –712.
39.Gardiner GA Jr, Koltun W, Kandarpa K, et al.
Thrombolysis of occluded femoropopliteal grafts. AJR
Am J Roentgenol . 1986;147:621 –626.
40.Belkin M, Donaldson MC, Whittemore AD, et al.
Observations on the use of thrombolytic agents forthrombotic occlusion of infrainguinal vein grafts.J Vasc Surg . 1990;11:289 –294; discussion 295-296 .
41.Shortell CK, Ouriel K. Thrombolysis in acute pe-
ripheral arterial occlusion: predictors of immediate
success. Ann Vasc Surg . 1994;8:59 –65.
42.Weaver FA, Comerota AJ, Youngblood M, et al.
Surgical revascularization versus thrombolysis fornonembolic lower extremity native artery occlusions:results of a prospective randomized trial. The STILEInvestigators. Surgery versus thrombolysis forischemia of the lower extremity. J Vasc Surg . 1996;24:
513–521; discussion 521-523 .
43.Eliason JL, Wake ﬁeld TW. Metabolic consequences
of acute limb ischemia and their clinical implications.Semin Vasc Surg . 2009;22:29 –33.
11.2.2. Adjunctive Therapies to Minimize Tissue Loss
in ALI
1.Rothenberg KA, George EL, Trickey AW, et al.
Delayed fasciotomy is associated with higher risk ofmajor amputation in patients with acute limb ischemia.
Ann Vasc Surg . 2019;59:195 –201.
2.Farber A, Tan TW, Hamburg NM, et al. Early fas-
ciotomy in patients with extremity vascular injury isassociated with decreased risk of adverse limb out-comes: a review of the National Trauma Data Bank.Injury . 2012;43:1486 –1491 .
3.Eliason JL, Wake ﬁeld TW. Metabolic consequences
of acute limb ischemia and their clinical implications.Semin Vasc Surg . 2009;22:29 –33.
4.Henke PK. Contemporary management of acute
limb ischemia: factors associated with amputation and
in-hospital mortality. Semin Vasc Surg . 2009;22:34 –
40.
5.Kuoppala M, Akeson J, Svensson P, et al. Risk fac-
tors for haemorrhage during local intra-arterialthrombolysis for lower limb ischaemia. J Thromb
Thrombolysis . 2011;31:226 –232.
6.Creager MA, Kaufman JA, Conte MS. Clinical prac-
tice. Acute limb ischemia. N Engl J Med . 2012;366:
2198 –2206 .
7.von Keudell AG, Weaver MJ, Appleton PT, et al.
Diagnosis and treatment of acute extremity compart-ment syndrome. Lancet . 2015;386:1299 –1310 .
8.Wesslen C, Wahlgren CM. Contemporary manage-
ment and outcome after lower extremity fasciotomy innon-trauma-related vascular surgery. Vasc Endovas-
cular Surg . 2018;52:493 –497.
11.2.3. Anticoagulation for ALI
1.Altoijry A, MacKenzie KS, Corriveau MM, et al.
Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia causing graftthrombosis and bowel ischemia postendovascular
aneurysm repair. J Vasc Surg . 2015;61:234 –236.
2.Turba UC, Bozlar U, Simsek S. Catheter-directed
thrombolysis of acute lower extremity arterial throm-bosis in a patient with heparin-induced thrombocyto-penia. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv . 2007;70:1046 –
1050 .
11.3. Diagnostic Evaluation for the Cause of ALI1.Bekwelem W, Connolly SJ, Halperin JL, et al.
Extracranial systemic embolic events in patients withnonvalvular atrial ﬁbrillation: incidence, risk factors,
and outcomes. Circulation . 2015;132:796 –803.
2.
Duval S, Keo HH, Oldenburg NC, et al. The impact of
prolonged lower limb ischemia on amputation, mor-tality, and functional status: the FRIENDS registry. Am
Heart J . 2014;168:577 –587.
3.Morris-Stiff G, D ’Souza J, Raman S, et al. Update
experience of surgery for acute limb ischaemia in adistrict general hospital –are we getting any better?
Ann R Coll Surg Engl . 2009;91:637 –640.
4.Landry GJ, Shukla R, Rahman A, et al. Demographic
and echocardiographic predictors of anatomic site andoutcomes of surgical interventions for cardiogenic limbemboli. Vasc Med . 2016;21:528 –534.
5.Creager MA, Kaufman JA, Conte MS. Clinical prac-
tice. Acute limb ischemia. N Engl J Med . 2012;366:
2198 –2206 .
6.Bonaca MP, Gutierrez JA, Creager MA, et al. Acute
limb ischemia and outcomes with vorapaxar in patients
with peripheral artery disease: results from the trial toassess the effects of vorapaxar in preventing heartattack and stroke in patients with atherosclerosis-thrombolysis in myocardial infarction 50 (TRA2
/C14P-
TIMI 50). Circulation . 2016;133:997 –1005 .
7.Anand SS, Bosch J, Eikelboom JW, et al. Rivarox-
aban with or without aspirin in patients with stableperipheral or carotid artery disease: an international,randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.Lancet . 2018;391:219 –229.
8.Hess CN, Huang Z, Patel MR, et al. Acute limb
ischemia in peripheral artery disease. Circulation .
2019;140:556 –565.
9.Attisani L, Pucci A, Luoni G, et al. COVID-19 and
acute limb ischemia: a systematic review. J Cardiovasc
Surg (Torino) . 2021;62:542 –547.
10.Bellosta R, Luzzani L, Natalini G, et al. Acute limb
ischemia in patients with COVID-19 pneumonia. J Vasc
Surg. 2020;72:1864 –1872 .
11.Valerio S, Bracale UM, Giribono AM, et al. Acute
lower limb ischemia complicating pemetrexed and
carboplatin combination chemotherapy for malignant
pleural mesothelioma. Ann Ital Chir . 2014;85(ePub).
S2239253X14023019 .
12.Turnipseed WD. Popliteal entrapment syndrome.
J Vasc Surg . 2002;35:910 –915.
13.Santiago MB, Paz A. Acute peripheral and/or
cutaneous ischemic syndrome: what rheumatologistsshould know. J Clin Rheumatol . 2021;27:73 –79.
14.Deitcher SR, Carman TL, Sheikh MA, et al. Hyper-
coagulable syndromes: evaluation and managementstrategies for acute limb ischemia. Semin Vasc Surg .
2001;14:74 –85.
15.Hinojosa CA, Anaya-Ayala JE, Bermudez-Serrato K,
et al. Surgical Interventions for organ and limbGornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042592

ischemia associated with primary and secondary anti-
phospholipid antibody syndrome with arterialinvolvement. Vasc Endovascular Surg . 2017;51:550 –
554.
16.Robinson WP 3rd, Belkin M. Acute limb ischemia
due to popliteal artery aneurysm: a continuing surgicalchallenge. Semin Vasc Surg . 2009;22:17 –24.
17.Perkins ZB, Kersey AJ, White JM, et al. Impact of
ischemia duration on lower limb salvage in combatcasualties. Ann Surg . 2022;276:532 –538.
18.Khoynezhad A, Rao R, Trento A, et al. Management
of acute type B aortic dissections and acute limbischemia. J Cardiovasc Surg (Torino) . 2011;52:507 –517.
12. Longitudinal Follow-Up of PAD
1.Nordanstig J, Wann-Hansson C, Karlsson J, et al.
Vascular Quality of Life Questionnaire-6 facilitateshealth-related quality of life assessment in peripheral
arterial disease. J Vasc Surg . 2014;59:700 –707.
2.Treat-Jacobson D, Lindquist RA, Witt DR, et al. The
PADQOL: development and validation of a PAD-
speciﬁc quality of life questionnaire. Vasc Med .
2012;17:405 –415.
3.Kim BH, Cho KI, Spertus J, et al. Peripheral artery
questionnaire improves ankle brachial index screening
in symptomatic patients with peripheral artery disease.
Int J Clin Pract . 2014;68:1488 –1495 .
4.Noyes AM, Abbott JD, Gosch K, et al. Association
between health status and sociodemographic, clinical
and treatment disparities in the Patient-centeredOutcomes Related to TReatment Practices in Periph-eral Arterial Disease: Investigating Trajectories(PORTRAIT) registry. Vasc Med . 2018;23:32 –38.
5.Hammad TA, Smolderen KG, Spertus JA, et al. As-
sociations of exercise ankle-brachial index, pain-freewalking distance and maximum walking distance withthe Peripheral Artery Questionnaire: ﬁnding from the
PORTRAIT PAD Registry. Vasc Med . 2019;24:32 –40.
6.McDermott MM, Guralnik JM, Criqui MH, et al. Six-
minute walk is a better outcome measure than tread-mill walking tests in therapeutic trials of patients with
peripheral artery disease. Circulation . 2014;130:61 –68.
7.Pastori D, Farcomeni A, Milanese A, et al. Statins
and major adverse limb events in patients with pe-ripheral artery disease: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Thromb Haemost . 2020;120:866 –875.
8.
Heart Protection Study Collaborative Group. Ran-
domized trial of the effects of cholesterol-lowering
with simvastatin on peripheral vascular and other
major vascular outcomes in 20,536 people with pe-ripheral arterial disease and other high-risk conditions.J Vasc Surg . 2007;45:645 –654; discussion 653-654 .
9.Katsanos K, Spiliopoulos S, Saha P, et al. Compar-
ative ef ﬁcacy and safety of different antiplatelet
agents for prevention of major cardiovascular eventsand leg amputations in patients with peripheral arterialdisease: a systematic review and network meta-anal-ysis. PLoS One . 2015;10:e0135692 .
10.Bonaca MP, Bauersachs RM, Anand SS, et al.
Rivaroxaban in peripheral artery disease after revas-cularization. N Engl J Med . 2020;382:1994 –2004 .
11.Anand SS, Caron F, Eikelboom JW, et al. Major
adverse limb events and mortality in patients withperipheral artery disease: the COMPASS trial. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2018;71:2306 –2315 .
12.Piller LB, Simpson LM, Baraniuk S, et al. Charac-
teristics and long-term follow-up of participants withperipheral arterial disease during ALLHAT. J Gen Intern
Med. 2014;29:1475 –1483 .
13.Venermo M, Sprynger M, Desormais I, et al. Editor ’s
choice - follow-up of patients after revascularisationfor peripheral arterial diseases: a consensus documentfrom the European Society of Cardiology WorkingGroup on Aorta and Peripheral Vascular Diseases andthe European Society for Vascular Surgery. Eur J Vasc
Endovasc Surg . 2019;58:641 –653.
14.Zierler RE, Jordan WD, Lal BK, et al. The Society for
Vascular Surgery practice guidelines on follow-up after
vascular surgery arterial procedures. J Vasc Surg .
2018;68:256 –284.
15.Owens CD, Gasper WJ, Rahman AS, et al. Vein graft
failure. J Vasc Surg . 2015;61:203 –216.
16.Kruger D. Neo-intimal hyperplasia, diabetes and
endovascular injury. Cardiovasc J Afr . 2012;23:507 –511.
17.Expert Panel on Vascular Imaging, Cooper K,
Majdalany BS, et al. ACR appropriateness criteria /C226
lower extremity arterial revascularization-post-therapy imaging. J Am Coll Radiol . 2018;15:S104 –S115.
18.Barleben A, Bandyk DF. Surveillance and follow-up
after revascularization for critical limb ischemia. Semin
Vasc Surg . 2014;27:75 –81.
19.
Martinez-Rico C, Marti-Mestre X, Jimenez-Guiu X,
et al. Ultrasound surveillance in endovascular revascu-
larization of lower limbs. Ann Vasc Surg . 2019;56:
274–279.
20.Mohler ER 3rd, Gornik HL, Gerhard-Herman M,
et al. ACCF/ACR/AIUM/ASE/ASN/ICAVL/SCAI/SCCT/SIR/SVM/SVS/SVU 2012 appropriate use criteria for
peripheral vascular ultrasound and physiological
testing part I: arterial ultrasound and physiologicaltesting: a report of the American College of CardiologyFoundation Appropriate Use Criteria Task Force,American College of Radiology, American Institute ofUltrasound in Medicine, American Society of Echocar-diography, American Society of Nephrology, Interso-
cietal Commission for the Accreditation of Vascular
Laboratories, Society for Cardiovascular Angiographyand Interventions, Society of Cardiovascular ComputedTomography, Society for Interventional Radiology,Society for Vascular Medicine, Society for VascularSurgery, and Society for Vascular Ultrasound. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2012;60:242 –276.
21.Abu Dabrh AM, Mohammed K, Farah W, et al.
Systematic review and meta-analysis of duplex ultra-sound surveillance for infrainguinal vein bypass grafts.J Vasc Surg . 2017;66:1885 –1891.e8 .
22.Davies AH, Hawdon AJ, Sydes MR, et al. Is duplex
surveillance of value after leg vein bypass grafting?
Principal results of the Vein Graft Surveillance Rand-
omised Trial (VGST). Circulation . 2005;112:1985 –1991 .
23.Brumberg RS, Back MR, Armstrong PA, et al. The
relative importance of graft surveillance and warfarintherapy in infrainguinal prosthetic bypass failure.J Vasc Surg . 2007;46:1160 –1166 .
24.Lalak NJ, Hanel KC, Hunt J, et al. Duplex scan
surveillance of infrainguinal prosthetic bypass grafts.J Vasc Surg . 1994;20:637 –641.25.Davins Riu M, Borras Perez X, Artigas Raventos V,
et al. Use of telehealth as a new model for followingintermittent claudication and promoting patientexpertise. Telemed J E Health . 2018;24:773 –781.
26.Lee JK, Hung CS, Huang CC, et al. The costs and
cardiovascular bene ﬁts in patients with peripheral ar-
tery disease from a fourth-generation synchronoustelehealth program: retrospective cohort study. J Med
Internet Res . 2021;23:e24346 .
27.Castaneda PR, Duffy B, Andraska EA, et al. Out-
comes and safety of electronic consult use in vascularsurgery. J Vasc Surg . 2020;71:1726 –1732.
28.Takahashi EA, Schwamm LH, Adeoye OM, et al. An
overview of telehealth in the management of cardio-
vascular disease: a scienti ﬁc statement from the
American Heart Association. Circulation . 2022;146:
e558 –e568 .
29.Conte MS, Bradbury AW, Kolh P, et al. Global
vascular guidelines on the management of chronic
limb-threatening ischemia. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg .
2019;58(Suppl 1):S1 –S109.e33
.
30.Kolte D, Parikh SA, Piazza G, et al. Vascular teams
in peripheral vascular disease. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2019;73:2477 –2486 .
31.Hicks CW, Canner JK, Lum YW, et al. Long-term
outcomes of an endovascular- ﬁrst approach for dia-
betic patients with predominantly tibial diseasetreated in a multidisciplinary setting. Ann Vasc Surg .
2019;60:315 –326.e2 .
32.Dhand S. Multidisciplinary approach to PAD: who ’s
on your team? Semin Intervent Radiol . 2018;35:378 –
383.
33.Saratzis A, Jaspers NEM, Gwilym B, et al. Obser-
vational study of the medical management of patients
with peripheral artery disease. Br J Surg . 2019;106:
1168 –1177.
34.Spertus J. Barriers to the use of patient-reported
outcomes in clinical care. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Out-
comes . 2014;7:2 –4.
35.Smolderen KG, Alabi O, Collins TC, et al. Advancing
peripheral artery disease quality of care and outcomesthrough patient-reported health status assessment: ascienti ﬁc statement from the American Heart Associ-
ation. Circulation . 2022;146:e286 –e297 .
36.Spitzer RL, Kroenke K, Williams JB. Validation and
utility of a self-report version of PRIME-MD: the PHQprimary care study. Primary Care Evaluation of MentalDisorders. Patient Health Questionnaire. JAMA .
1999;282:1737 –1744 .
37.McDermott MM, Guralnik JM, Tian L, et al. Inci-
dence and prognostic signi ﬁcance of depressive
symptoms in peripheral artery disease. J Am Heart
Assoc . 2016;5:e002959 .
38.Arya S, Lee S, Zahner GJ, et al. The association of
comorbid depression with mortality and amputation in
veterans with peripheral artery disease. J Vasc Surg .
2018;68:536 –545.e2 .
39.Cherr GS, Wang J, Zimmerman PM, et al. Depres-
sion is associated with worse patency and recurrent leg
symptoms after lower extremity revascularization.
J Vasc Surg . 2007;45:744 –750.
40.
Bonaca MP, Nault P, Giugliano RP, et al. Low-
density lipoprotein cholesterol lowering withJACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2593

evolocumab and outcomes in patients with peripheral
artery disease: insights from the FOURIER trial(Further Cardiovascular Outcomes Research WithPCSK9 Inhibition in Subjects With Elevated Risk). Cir-
culation . 2018;137:338 –350.
41.Bonaca MP, Gutierrez JA, Cannon C, et al. Poly-
vascular disease, type 2 diabetes, and long-termvascular risk: a secondary analysis of the IMPROVE-ITtrial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol . 2018;6:934 –943.
42.Suckow BD, Kraiss LW, Schanzer A, et al. Statin
therapy after infrainguinal bypass surgery for criticallimb ischemia is associated with improved 5-year sur-vival. J Vasc Surg . 2015;61:126 –133.
43.Hiatt WR, Fowkes FG, Heizer G, et al. Ticagrelor
versus clopidogrel in symptomatic peripheral arterydisease. N Engl J Med . 2017;376:32 –40.
44.Antithrombotic Trialists Collaboration. Collabora-
tive meta-analysis of randomised trials of antiplatelettherapy for prevention of death, myocardial infarction,and stroke in high risk patients. BMJ. 2002;324:71 –86.
45.Critical Leg Ischaemia Prevention Study (CLIPS)
Group, Catalano M, Born G. Prevention of serious
vascular events by aspirin amongst patients with pe-ripheral arterial disease: randomized, double-blindtrial. J Intern Med . 2007;261:276 –284.
46.Berger JS, Krantz MJ, Kittelson JM, et al. Aspirin
for the prevention of cardiovascular events in patientswith peripheral artery disease: a meta-analysis of
randomized trials. JAMA . 2009;301:1909 –1919 .
47.CAPRIE Steering Committee. A randomised, blin-
ded, trial of clopidogrel versus aspirin in patients at
risk of ischaemic events (CAPRIE). Lancet . 1996;348:
1329 –1339 .
48.Eikelboom JW, Connolly SJ, Bosch J, et al. Rivar-
oxaban with or without aspirin in stable cardiovasculardisease. N Engl J Med . 2017;377:1319 –1330 .
49.Goldman MP, Clark CJ, Craven TE, et al. Effect of
intensive glycemic control on risk of lower extremityamputation. J Am Coll Surg . 2018;227:596 –604.
50.Lane KL, Abusamaan MS, Voss BF, et al. Glycemic
control and diabetic foot ulcer outcomes: a systematic
review and meta-analysis of observational studies.
J Diabetes Complications . 2020;34:107638 .
51.Arya S, Binney ZO, Khakharia A, et al. High hemo-
globin A(1c) associated with increased adverse limbevents in peripheral arterial disease patients under-
going revascularization. J Vasc Surg . 2018;67:217 –228.
e1
.
13.2. Advocacy Priorities
1.American Heart Association. PAD national action
plan. 2022. Accessed June 7, 2023. https://professional.heart.org/-/media/PHD-Files-2/Science-
News/p/PAD-National-Action-Plan.pdf
2.Creager MA, Matsushita K, Arya S, et al. Reducing
nontraumatic lower-extremity amputations by 20% by
2030: time to get to our feet: a policy statement from
the American Heart Association. Circulation . 2021;143:
e875 –e891 .
KEY WORDS ACC/AHA Clinical Practice
Guidelines, acute limb ischemia, angioplasty,ankle-brachial index, anticoagulation therapy,
antiplatelet therapy, an tithrombotic therapy,
atherosclerosis, atypical leg symptoms, bloodpressure lowering, bypass graft/bypass grafting/surgical bypass, cilostazol, claudication/intermittent claudication, critical limb ischemia/chronic limb-threatenin g ischemia, diabetes,
diagnostic testing, endovascular therapy,
exercise rehabilitation/e xercise therapy/exercise
training/supervised exercise, foot care, hybridapproach, lipid lowering, lower extremity/footwound/ulcer, medical management, openrevascularization, percutaneous therapy,peripheral artery disease/peripheral arterial
disease/peripheral vascular disease/lower
extremity arterial disease, smoking/smokingcessation, statin, stenting, thrombolysis,vascular intervention, vascular surgeryGornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042594

APPENDIX 1. AUTHOR RELATIONSHIPS WITH INDUSTRY AND OTHER ENTITIES —2024 ACC/AHA/
AACVPR/APMA/ABC/SCAI/SVM/SVN/SVS/SIR/V ESS GUIDELINE FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF LOWER
EXTREMITY PERIPHERAL ARTERY DISEASE
Committee
Member Employment ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalPersonal
ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational,
or Other
Financial Bene ﬁtExpert
Witness
Heather L.
Gornik ¶
(Chair)University Hospitals
Harrington Heart &
Vascular Institute —
Co-Director, Vascular
CenterNOT RELEVANT
nEducational
Symposia
nNorthwesternUniversityNone NOT
RELEVANT
nFlexlife
Health *None NOT RELEVANT
nFibromuscular
Dysplasia Society of
America †
nIntersocietal Accredi-
tation Commission-
Vascular Testing †
nWomen as One *
nSVM/ Vascular Medicine
journal †
nThe Anticoagulation
Forum *None
Herbert D.
Aronow
(Co-Vice-
Chair)Brown University,
Alpert Medical
School —Associate
ProfessorNOT RELEVANT
nMedscapeNone None NOT RELEVANT
nPhilips (DSMB)NOT RELEVANT
nCSI‡
nHenry Ford Health *
nMedtronic ‡
nNIH ‡
nShockwave Medical ‡
nSilk Road Medical, Inc.,
CEC
nSVM, Trustee †None
Philip P.
Goodney
(Co-Vice-Chair)Dartmouth Hitchcock
Medical Center —
Professor, Vice Chair
of Research, Heart and
Vascular CenterNone None None None None None
Shipra Arya Stanford University
School of Medicine —
Associate Professor
of Surgery, Section
ChiefRELEVANT
nGoreNone None None None None
Luke Packard
BrewsterEmory University
School of Medicine —
Associate Professor
With Tenure; Atlanta
VA Medical Center —
Section Chief Vascular
SurgeryNone None None None NOT RELEVANT
nNIH ‡
nVA (CSP) ‡NOT RELEVANT
nDefendant,
Stent mal
deployment,2021 *
nDefendant,
Deep vein
thrombosis,
2021 *
Lori Byrd Iowa Medical Society
& Iowa Chapter of the
American Academy of
Pediatrics —Manager,
Initiatives & Special
ProjectsNone None None None NOT RELEVANT
nDes Moines University †None
Venita
ChandraStanford University —
Clinical Associate
Professor of SurgeryRELEVANT
nAbbott
nAlucent
Biomedical †
nCook
nCovidien
nMedtronic *
nShockwave
Medical *
nW.L. GoreRELEVANT
nPenumbra
nSmith and
NephewNone None RELEVANT
nAbbott *
nMedtronic *
nNuvasive *
nSilk Road Medical
NOT RELEVANT
nCook ‡
nNIH ‡
nPenumbra ‡
nSanﬁt Therapeutics ‡
nShockwave ‡
nW.L. Gore ‡
nViva, Board Member *None
Continued on the next pageJACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2595

Committee
Member Employment ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalPersonal
ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational,
or Other
Financial Bene ﬁtExpert
Witness
Douglas E.
DrachmanMassachusetts
General Hospital —
Heart Center Director
of Education; Harvard
Medical School —
Assistant ProfessorRELEVANT
nAbbott *
nBoston Scienti ﬁc*
nCardiovascular
Systems *
nCordis/Cardinal
Health
NOT RELEVANT
nBroadviewVenturesNone None None NOT RELEVANT
nAtrium Medical
Corporation ‡None
Jennifer M.
Eaves §AHA/ACC, Science and
Health Advisor,
GuidelinesNone None None None None None
Jonathan K.
ErhmanHenry Ford Hospital —
Associate Program
Director, Department
of Internal Medicine,
Division of
Cardiovascular
MedicineNone None None None None None
John N. Evans Beaumont Hospital —
Chief of Podiatry;
APMA —Chair, Health
Policy and PracticeNone RELEVANT
nJanssen
Pharmaceuticals *
nModulim †None None NOT RELEVANT
nAmerican Board of
Foot and Ankle
Surgery †
nAPMA †
nAmputation Preven-
tion Symposium
nNew Cardiovascular
Horizons †None
Thomas S.D.
Getchius §AHA/ACC, National
Senior Director,
GuidelinesNone None None None None None
J. Antonio
GutiérrezDuke University
Hospital —Assistant
Professor of MedicineRELEVANT
nAmgen
nJanssen
Pharmaceuticals
nMedicureNone None NOT RELEVANT
nVA*RELEVANT
nBard
nBoston Scienti ﬁcNone
Beau M.
HawkinsUniversity of
Oklahoma Health
Sciences Center
(Employed until
January 31, 2023) —
Associate Professor of
Medicine, Internal
Medicine; Oklahoma
Heart HospitalNOT RELEVANT
nBaim Institute for
Clinical ResearchNone None NOT RELEVANT
nCSL Behring, PINOT RELEVANT
nBoston Scienti ﬁc‡
nHemostemix ‡
nNIH ‡None
Connie N.
HessUniversity of Colorado
School of Medicine —
Associate Professor of
Medicine, Division of
CardiologyNone RELEVANT
nAmgen *None RELEVANT
nAmgen *
nBayer *
nJanssen
Pharmaceuticals *
NOT RELEVANT
nARCA Biopharma *NOT RELEVANT
nUniversity of Colorado,
CPC Clinical ResearchNone
Karen J. Ho Northwestern
University Feinberg
School of Medicine —
Assistant Professor,
Division of Vascular
SurgeryNone None None RELEVANT
nAnGes USA †
nViromed, PI †
nZimmer Biomet,
PI†
NOT RELEVANT
nNIH/NHLBI *None None
Continued on the next pageAPPENDIX 1. CONTINUEDGornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042596

Committee
Member Employment ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalPersonal
ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational,
or Other
Financial Bene ﬁtExpert
Witness
W. Schuyler
JonesDuke University,
Department of
Medicine —Associate
Professor of MedicineRELEVANT
nBayer *
nJanssen
Pharmaceuticals *None None RELEVANT
nBoehringer
Ingelheim
nBristol Myers
Squibb
NOT RELEVANT
nPCORINone None
Esther S.H.
KimVanderbilt University
Medical Center —
Associate Professor of
Medicine; Director,
Arteriopathy ClinicNone None None None NOT RELEVANT
nAHA †
nAcer Therapeutics
nIntersocietal Accredi-
tation Committee †
nSCAD Alliance, Scien-
tiﬁc Advisory Board †
nSVM †None
Scott Kinlay VA Boston Healthcare
System —Associate
Chief Cardiology,
Cardiovascular
Division; Director,
Cardiac
Catheterization
Laboratory & Vascular
MedicineNone None None NOT RELEVANT
nDOD †
nNIH †NOT RELEVANT
nABIMNone
Lee Kirksey Cleveland Clinic —Vice
Chairman, Vascular
SurgeryNone None None None None None
Debra
Kohlman-
TrigoboffDuke University, Duke
Heart and Vascular —
Nurse PractitionerNone None None None None NOT RELEVANT
nPlaintiff,
Acute limb
ischemia,
2021
nPlaintiff,
Acute limb
ischemia,
2020
Chandler A.
LongDuke University
Medical Center,
Department of
Surgery —Assistant
Professor of Surgery;
Associate Director,
Vascular Surgery
Fellowship & Vascular
Surgery ResidencyNone None None None None None
Amy West
PollakMayo Clinic Florida —
Director, Women ’s
Heart Clinic; Director,
Community and
Comprehensive
Cardiology ClinicNone None None None NOT RELEVANT
nUniversity of Florida
Health, WARRIOR ‡None
Saher S. Sabri MedStar Georgetown
University Hospital,
Department of
Radiology —Chief of
Interventional
Radiology, Professor
of RadiologyRELEVANT
nBoston Scienti ﬁc
nMedtronic
nPhilipsNone None NOT RELEVANT
nAlucent (DSMB)None None
Lawrence B.
SadwinBradley Hospital
Foundation —Chairman
of the Board,
AdministrationNone None None None None None
Continued on the next pageAPPENDIX 1. CONTINUEDJACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2597

Committee
Member Employment ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalPersonal
ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational,
or Other
Financial Bene ﬁtExpert
Witness
Eric A.
SecemskyBeth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center —
Director of Vascular
Intervention, Division
of Cardiology; Director
of Vascular Research,
Richard A. and Susan
F. Smith Center for
Outcomes; Harvard
Medical School
Department of
Medicine —Assistant
Professor of MedicineRELEVANT
nAbbott *
nBayer *
nBoston Scienti ﬁc*
nCSI*
nInari Medical
nJanssen
Pharmaceuticals *
nMedtronic *
nPhilips *
nVenture Medical
Group *
NOT RELEVANT
nEndovascular
Engineering *RELEVANT
nBD Bard
nCook *None RELEVANT
nAstraZeneca *
nBD Bard *
nBoston Scienti ﬁc*
nCook *
nCSI*
nMedtronic *
nPhilips *
NOT RELEVANT
nBaim Institute(DSMB)
nLaminate Medical *RELEVANT
nAngiodynamics
NOT RELEVANT
nAbbott ‡
nBoston Scienti ﬁc‡
nFDA*
nNIH/NHLBI ‡*
nUniversity of Califor-
nia, San FranciscoNone
Maya Serhal Boston University
Medical Center —
Fellow-in-Training,
Cardiovascular
MedicineNone None None None None None
Mehdi H.
ShishehborCase Western Reserve
University School of
Medicine —Professor of
Medicine;
Harrington Heart and
Vascular Institute —
PresidentRELEVANT
nAbbott *
nBoston Scienti ﬁc*
nMedtronic *
nPhilips *
nTerumoNone None RELEVANT
nInari Medical
nTrireme Medical,
PI*NOT RELEVANT
nAdvaNanoT
nAstraZeneca ‡
nCardiovascular In-
novations Foundation *
nCardiovascular Inter-
ventional Fellows †
nCase Western Reserve
University School ofMedicine, Interven-
tional Fellowship
Director
nDiscovery Therapeutics
Caribe, LLC †
nMedtronic ‡
nMercator ‡
nNanoTherapies Inc. †
nNIH ‡
nPhilips ‡
nTrireme ‡
nUniversity Hospitals ‡
nVolcano ‡None
Diane Treat-
JacobsonUniversity of
Minnesota, School of
Nursing —Professor
and Associate Dean for
Research; Cora Meidl
Siehl Chair in Nursing
Research for Improved
Patient Care;
University of Virginia —
Associate Professor,
Radiology and Medical
ImagingNone None None NOT RELEVANT
nNHLBI *NOT RELEVANT
nNIA†None
Luke R.
WilkinsUniversity of Virginia —
Associate Professor,
Radiology and Medical
ImagingNone None None NOT RELEVANT
nACS †
nDOD †
nUVA †None None
Continued on the next pageAPPENDIX 1. CONTINUEDGornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042598

Committee
Member Employment ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalPersonal
ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational,
or Other
Financial Bene ﬁtExpert
Witness
Deepak L.
Bhatt kBrigham and Women ’s
Hospital Heart &
Vascular Center —
Executive Director of
Interventional and
Cardiovascular
Programs;
Harvard Medical School —
Professor of Medicine,
Department of
MedicineRELEVANT
nBoehringer
Ingelheim
NOT RELEVANT
nArnold and Porter *
nCanadian Medical
and Surgical
Knowledge Trans-
lation Research
Group *
nCellProthera *
nCowen and
Company
nDuke ClinicalResearch Institute
nElsevier Practice
Update
Cardiology *
nK2P*
nLevel Ex *
nMedtelligence/
WebMD *
nMJH Life Sciences *
nOakstone CME *
nPiper Sandler
nWebMD *
nWiley *None None RELEVANT
nAbbott *
nAmarin *
nAmgen *
nAstraZeneca *
nBayer *
nBoehringer
Ingelheim *
nBristol Myers
Squibb *
nCardax *
nChiesi *
nEisai *
nEli Lilly *
nEthicon *
nFlowCo †
nForest
Laboratories *
nIdorsia *
nIronwood *
nJanssen
Pharmaceuticals *
nMedtronic *
nNovo Nordisk †
nPﬁzer*
nPLx Pharma *
nRegeneron *
nRoche *
nSanoﬁ-aventis *
nSynaptic *
nTakeda †
nThe Medicines
Company *
NOT RELEVANT
n89bio
nAcesion Pharma
(DSMB)
nAﬁmmune *
nAker Biomarine *
nAssistance
Publique-Hopitaux
de Paris (DSMB) *
nBeren *
nBoston Scienti ﬁc
(DSMB) *
nChiesi *
nCleveland Clinic
(DSMB)
nContego (DSMB)
nDuke ClinicalResearch Institute(DSMB)
nFaraday *
nFractyl *
nGarmin *
nHarvard Clinical
Research Institute(DSMB)
nHLS Therapeutics *RELEVANT
nBayer *
nBiotronik ‡
nBristol Myers Squibb,
Board Member *
nCardax *
nJanssen
Pharmaceuticals *
nMerck †
nPLx Pharma *
nRegado Biosciences †
NOT RELEVANT
nAbbott ‡
nACC*
nAHA †
nAngioWave *
nBaim Institute for
Clinical Research *
nBayer *
nBelvoir Publications *
nBiotronik ‡
nBoston Scienti ﬁc‡
nCellProthera *
nCereno Scienti ﬁc*
nClinical Cardiology †
nCSI‡
nDRS.LINQ *
nDuke Clinical Research
Institute *
nElsevier
nEndotronix ‡
nHarvard Clinical
Research Institute
nHigh Enroll *
nHMP Global *
nJanssen
Pharmaceuticals *
nJournal of Invasive
Cardiology *
nMedscape Cardiology †
nMyokardia *
nNervaMed *
nNovo Nordisk
nPhaseBio †
nPhilips ‡
nPHRI *
nPLx Pharma *
nPopulation Health
Research Institute *
nSlack Publications/
Cardiology Research
Foundation *
nSociety of Cardiovas-
cular Patient Care,
previously the Society
of Chest Pain Centers *
nSt. Jude Medical ‡
nStasys *
nSvelte ‡NOT RELEVANT
nArnold &
Porter *
nDefendant,
Clopidogrellitigation,
2022 *
Continued on the next pageAPPENDIX 1. CONTINUEDJACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2599

Committee
Member Employment ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalPersonal
ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational,
or Other
Financial Bene ﬁtExpert
Witness
nIschemix *
nJavelin (DSMB) *
nLexicon *
nMayo Clinic
(DSMB)
nModerna *
nMount Sinai Medi-
cal Center *
(DSMB)
nModerna *
nMyoKardia *
nNirvamed *
nNovartis (DSMB) *
nOkwin *
nPhaseBio *
nPopulation Health
Research Institute
(DSMB)
nRecardio *
nRegeneron *
nReid Hoffman
Foundation *
nRoche *
nRutgers University
(DSMB)
nSanoﬁ-aventis *
nStasys *
nSynaptic *
nTakeda †
nThe Medicines
Company *nTobeSoft *
nVA Healthcare System †
nVascular Solutions ‡
nWebMD *
This table represents all relationships of committee members with industry and other entities that were reported by authors, including those not dee med to be relevant to this document, at the
time this document was under development. The table does not necessarily re ﬂect relationships with industry at the time of publication. A person is deemed to have a signi ﬁcant interest in a
business if the interest represents ownership of $5% of the voting stock or share of the business entity or ownership of $$5,000 of the fair market value of the business entity, or if funds
received by the person from the business entity exceed 5% of the person ’s gross income for the previous year. Relationships that exist with no ﬁnancial bene ﬁt are also included for the purpose of
transparency. Relationships in this table are modest unless otherwise noted. Please refer to https://www.acc.org/guidelines/about-guidelines-and-clinical-documents/relationship-with-industry-
policy for de ﬁnitions of disclosure categories or additional information about the ACC/AHA Disclosure Policy for Writing Committees.
*Signi ﬁcant relationship.
†Noﬁnancial bene ﬁt.
‡This disclosure was entered under the Clinical Trial Enroller category in the ACC ’s disclosure system. To appear in this category, the author acknowledges that there is no direct or institutional
relationship with the trial sponsor as de ﬁned in the (ACCF or AHA/ACC) Disclosure Policy for Writing Committees.
§Jennifer M. Eaves and Thomas S.D. Getchius are AHA/ACC joint staff members and acted as Science and Health Advisors for the “2024 ACC/AHA/AACVPR/APMA/ABC/SCAI/SVM/SVN/SVS/SIR/
VESS Guideline for the Management of Lower Extremity Peripheral Artery Disease. ”No relevant relationships to report. Nonvoting authors on recommendations and not included/counted in the
RWI balance for this writing committee.kDr. Bhatt elected to withdraw from the writing committee midway through document development.
¶CMS currently reports payments to Dr. Gornik in 2022 related to a grant from Sano ﬁ-Aventis; however, CMS is updating to more accurately re ﬂect that “Women as One ”was the grantor.
AACVPR indicates American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation; ABC, Association of Black Cardiologists; ABIM, American B oard of Internal Medicine; ACC, American
College of Cardiology; ACS, American College of Surgeons; AHA, American Heart Association; APMA, American Podiatric Medical Association; CME, con tinuing medical education; CSP, cooperative
studies program; DOD, Department of Defense; DSMB, data and safety monitoring board; FDA, U.S. Food and Drug Administration; NIA, National Institut e on Aging; NIH, National Institutes of
Health; NHLBI, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; PCORI, Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute; PI, principal investigator; SCAD , spontaneous coronary artery dissection; SCAI,
Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions; SIR, Society of Interventional Radiology; SVM, Society of Vascular Medicine; SVN, Soci ety for Vascular Nursing; SVS, Society for Vascular
Surgery; UVA, University of Virginia; VA, U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs; and VESS, Vascular & Endovascular Surgery Society.APPENDIX 1. CONTINUEDGornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042600

APPENDIX 2. REVIEWER RELATIONSHIPS WITH INDUSTRY AND OTHER ENTITIES —2024 ACC/AHA/
AACVPR/APMA/ABC/SCAI/SVM/SVN/SVS/SIR/V ESS GUIDELINE FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF LOWER
EXTREMITY PERIPHERAL ARTERY DISEASE
Reviewer Representation Employment ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalPersonal
ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational,
or Other
Financial Bene ﬁtExpert
Witness
Mark A.
Creager(Chair)ACC/AHA PAD
Guideline Peer
Review
CommitteeDartmouth-
Hitchcock
Medical CenterNone None None
nAHA, Strategically
Focused Vascular
Disease Research
NetworkNone None
Naomi M.
Hamburg
(Vice Chair)ACC/AHA PAD
Guideline Peer
Review
CommitteeBoston
University
School of
MedicinenBayer
nMerck
nNovo Nordisk
nSaniﬁtNone None nAHA †
nNIH*nAcceleron
Pharma *None
Olamide Alabi ACC/AHA PAD
Guideline Peer
Review
CommitteeEmory
UniversityNone None None None None None
S. Elissa Altin ACC/AHA PAD
Guideline Peer
Review
CommitteeYale School of
MedicineNone None None None nBard ‡
nBoston
Scienti ﬁc‡
nMicroPort ‡None
Sonia S. Anand ACC/AHA PAD
Guideline Peer
Review
CommitteeMcMaster
UniversitynBayer *
nJanssen
Pharmaceuticals *
nNovartisNone None None None None
Subhash
BanerjeeACC/AHA PAD
Guideline Peer
Review
Committee,
representing
SCAIVA North
Texas
Healthcare
SystemnGeneral Electric *nMedtronic *None nBoston Scienti ﬁc*
nChiesi †nCardiovascular
Innovations
Foundation *
nCSI‡
nPhilips ‡None
Merry Ellen
BarnettACC/AHA PAD
Guideline Peer
Review
CommitteeUniversity of
VirginiaNone None None None nBoston
Scienti ﬁc‡None
Robert Baulieu ACC/AHA PAD
Guideline Peer
Review
Committee,
representing
VESSUniversity of
MichiganNone None None None None None
Continued on the next pageJACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2601

Reviewer Representation Employment ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalPersonal
ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational,
or Other
Financial Bene ﬁtExpert
Witness
Marc P. Bonaca ACC/AHA PAD
Guideline Peer
Review
CommitteeUniversity of
Colorado
School of
MedicineNone None None nAbbott *
nAgios
Pharmaceuticals *
nAlexion Pharma *
nAlnylam *
nAmgen *
nAngionetics *
nARCA *
nARCA Biopharma *
nArray *
nAstraZeneca
Pharmaceuticals *
nAtentiv *
nAudentes *
nBayer *
nBetter Therapeutics *
nBrigham and
Women ’sH o s p i t a l *
nBristol Myers
Squibb *
nCambrian Biopharma *
nCardiol
Therapeutics *
nCellResearch *
nCook Regentec *
nCSL Behring *
nEidos Therapeutics *
nEP Trading Company *
nEsperion *
nEverlyWell *
nFaraday
Pharmaceuticals *
nFortress Biotech *
nHeart ﬂow*
nInsmed *
nJanssen
Pharmaceuticals *
nKowa Research *
nLexicon *
nMerck *
nModerna *
nNovo Nordisk *
nPﬁzer*
nPhaseBio *
nPPD Development *
nProthena
Biosciences *
nRegeneron *
nRegio Biosciences *
nSaniﬁt*
nSanoﬁ-Aventis *
nStealth
BioTherapeutics *
nUniversity of
Colorado *
nWorldwide Clinical
Trials *
nWraser *
nYale Cardiovascular
Research Group *nAHA *
nAnthos
Therapeutics *
nEPG
Communications
nEpizon Pharma *
nMedtronic
nNIH*
nNovartis *
nPﬁzer
nSilence
Therapeutics *
nSt. Luke ’sH o s p i -
tal of Kansas
City*
nThrombosis
Research
Institute *
nUniversity of
Pittsburgh *
nVamX *
nVertex
Pharmaceuticals *None
Continued on the next pageAPPENDIX 2. CONTINUEDGornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042602

APPENDIX 2. CONTINUED
Reviewer Representation Employment ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalPersonal
ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational,
or Other
Financial Bene ﬁtExpert
Witness
Yulanka
Castro-
DominguezACC/AHA PAD
Guideline Peer
Review
CommitteeYale New
Haven HospitalnBoston Scienti ﬁc
nMedtronic *None None None nAbbott ‡
nAbiomed ‡None
Foluso
FakoredeACC/AHA PAD
Guideline Peer
Review
CommitteeCardiovascular
Solutions of
Central
MississippiNone None None None None None
Laura Findeiss ACC/AHA PAD
Guideline Peer
Review
CommitteeEmory
UniversityNone None None None nFocused Cryo †
nGrady Health
System *nDefendant,
Class action
ﬁlter lawsuit,
2021 *
Yolanda
HendleyACC/AHA PAD
Guideline Peer
Review
Committee,
representing
ABCTrinity Health
Mid AtlanticNone None None None None None
Daniella
Kadian-
DodovACC/AHA PAD
Guideline Peer
Review
CommitteeIcahn School of
Medicine at
Mount SinainHurst ’s The Heart
Online
nMedscape *
nWomen as OnenAbbott *None None nAHA †
nASE †
nKDIGO
nMcGraw Hill
nSVS †None
Ahmed Kayssi ACC/AHA PAD
Guideline Peer
Review
Committee,
representing SVSSunnybrook
Research
InstituteNone None None None None None
Anna K.
KrawiszACC/AHA PAD
Guideline Peer
Review
CommitteeBrigham and
Women ’s
HospitalNone None None None None None
Mary M.
McDermottACC/AHA PAD
Guideline Peer
Review
CommitteeNorthwestern
UniversitynCambrianBiopharmaNone None
nAHA *
nArtAssist
nChromadex
nHelixmith *
nMars Inc.
nNIH*nAMA *
nNIH ‡
nRegeneron
nReserveageNone
Matthew
T. MenardACC/AHA PAD
Guideline Peer
Review
CommitteeBrigham and
Women ’s
HospitalnJanssenPharmaceuticalsNone None None None None
Sanjay Misra ACC/AHA PAD
Guideline Peer
Review
Committee,
representing SIRMayo Clinic None None None NIH †
nInova Vascular
nMedtronic ‡
nPavaj Vascular †None
Manesh R.
PatelACC/AHA PAD
Guideline Peer
Review
CommitteeDuke
UniversitynBayer *
nDuke CME
nJanssen
Pharmaceuticals *
nMedscape *None None nHeart ﬂow*
nJohnson & Johnson *
nNHLBI *
nPCORInMedtronic ‡None
Continued on the next pageJACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024 Gornik et al
JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –2604 2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline2603

APPENDIX 2. CONTINUED
Reviewer Representation Employment ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalPersonal
ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational,
or Other
Financial Bene ﬁtExpert
Witness
Rene Quiroz ACC/AHA PAD
Guideline Peer
Review
CommitteeCardiology
Clinic of San
AntonioNone None Wellvana * None nMedtronic ‡None
Elizabeth V.
RatchfordACC/AHA PAD
Guideline Peer
Review
CommitteeJohns Hopkins
University
School of
MedicineNone None None None nGenentech *
nRoche *None
Catherine R.
RatliffACC/AHA PAD
Guideline Peer
Review
Committee,
representing
SVNUniversity of
VirginiaNone None None None nSVNNone
Jeffrey A. Ross ACC/AHA PAD
Guideline Peer
Review
Committee,
representing
APMABaylor College
of MedicinenKCI-3M
nLifeNet HealthnLifeNet
HealthNone None None None
Kerry J.
StewardACC/AHA PAD
Guideline Peer
Review
Committee,
representing
AACVPRJohns Hopkins
University
School of
MedicineNone None None None None None
Leben Tefera ACC/AHA PAD
Guideline Peer
Review
Committee,
representing
SVMCleveland
ClinicNone None None None None None
Gabriela
VelazquezACC/AHA PAD
Guideline Peer
Review
CommitteeWake Forest
Baptist HealthNone None None None None None
Michael N.
YoungACC/AHA PAD
Guideline Peer
Review
CommitteeDartmouth-
Hitchcock
Medical CenternMedtronic *None None None nDCRI ‡
nEdwards
Lifesciences ‡
nSCAI ‡None
This table represents all reviewers ’relationships with industry and other entities that were reported at the time of peer review, including those not deemed to be relevant to this documen t, at the
time this document was under review. The table does not necessarily re ﬂect relationships with industry at the time of publication. A person is deemed to have a signi ﬁcant interest in a business if
the interest represents ownership of $5% of the voting stock or share of the business entity or ownership of $$5,000 of the fair market value of the business entity, or if funds received by the
person from the business entity exceed 5% of the person ’s gross income for the previous year. Relationships that exist with no ﬁnancial bene ﬁt are also included for the purpose of transparency.
Relationships in this table are modest unless otherwise noted. Please refer to http://www.acc.org/guidelines/about-guidelines-and-clinical-documents/relationships-with-industry-policy for
deﬁnitions of disclosure categories or additional information about the ACC/AHA Disclosure Policy for Writing Committees.
*Signi ﬁcant relationship.
†Noﬁnancial bene ﬁt.
‡This disclosure was entered under the Clinical Trial Enroller category in the ACC ’s disclosure system. To appear in this category, the author acknowledges that there is no direct or institutional
relationship with the trial sponsor as de ﬁned in the (ACCF or AHA/ACC) Disclosure Policy for Writing Committees.
AACVPR indicates American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation; ABC, Association of Black Cardiologists; ACC, American Co llege of Cardiology; AHA, American Heart
Association; AMA, American Medical Association; APMA, American Podiatric Medical Association; ASE, American Society of Echocardiography; CME, c ontinuing medical education; DCRI, Duke
Clinical Research Institute; KDIGO, Kidney Disease Improving Global Outcomes; NHLBI, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; NIH, National Ins titutes of Health; PAD, peripheral artery disease;
PCORI, Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute; SCAI, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography & Interventions; SIR, Society of Interventio nal Radiology; SVM, Society of Vascular Medicine;
SVN, Society for Vascular Nursing; SVS, Society for Vascular Medicine; VA, U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs; and VESS, Vascular & Endovascular Su rgery Society.Gornik et al JACC VOL. 83, NO. 24, 2024
2024 Peripheral Artery Disease Guideline JUNE 18, 2024:2497 –26042604