CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINE
2024 AHA/ACC/AMSSM/HRS/PACES/SCMR
Guideline for the Managementof Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy
A Report of the American Heart Association/American College of Cardiology
Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines
Developed in Collaboration With and Endorsed by the American Medical Society for Sports Medicine,
the Heart Rhythm Society, Pediatric & Congenital Electrophysiology Society, and the
Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance
Writing
CommitteeMembers *Steve R. Ommen, MD, FACC, FAHA, Chair
Carolyn Y. Ho, MD, FAHA, Vice Chair
Irfan M. Asif, MD, FAMSSM y
Seshadri Balaji, MBBS, MRCP(UK), P HD, FHRS z
Michael A. Burke, MD
Sharlene M. Day, MD, FAHA
Joseph A. Dearani, MD, FACCKelly C. Epps, MD, FACCLauren Evanovich, P
HDx
Victor A. Ferrari, MD, FACC, FAHA, MSCMR k{
José A. Joglar, MD, FACC, FAHA, FHRSSadiya S. Khan, MD, MS
C, FACC, FAHA#
Jeffrey J. Kim, MD, FACC, FHRS **
Michelle M. Kittleson, MD, P HD, FAHA, FACC k
Chayakrit Krittanawong, MD yy
Matthew W. Martinez, MD, FACCSeema Mital, MD, FACC, FAHA
Srihari S. Naidu, MD, FACC, FAHASara Saberi, MD, MSChristopher Semsarian, MBBS, P
HD, MPH, FHRS, FAHA
Sabrina Times, DHSC, MPH zz
Cynthia Burstein Waldman, JD x
*Writing committee members are required to recuse themselves from
voting on sections to which their speci ﬁc relationships with industry may
apply; see Appendix 1 for detailed information.
yAMSSM representative.
zHRS representative.
xLay stakeholder representative.
kAHA/ACC Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines liaison.
{SCMR representative.
#ACC/AHA Joint Committee on Performance Measures representative.**PACES representative.yyACC/AHA Joint Committee on Clinical Data Standards representative.
zzJoint ACC/AHA staff representative.This 2024 AHA/ACC/AMSSM/HRS/PACES/SCMR Guideline has
been reviewed and determined to be current as of May 2025.See the 2025 ACC/AHA methodology and policies manual for
information on reaf ﬁrmation.
ISSN 0735-1097/$36.00 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2024.02.014This document was approved by the American College of Cardiology Clinical Policy Approval Committee and the American Heart Association Science
Advisory and Coordinating Committee in January 2024, and the American College of Cardiology Science and Quality Committee and the American Heart
Association Executive Committee in February 2024.
The American College of Cardiology requests that this document be cited as follows: Ommen SR, Ho CY, Asif IM, Balaji S, Burke MA, Day SM, Dearani
JA, Epps-Anderson KC, Evanovich L, Ferrari VA, Joglar JA, Khan SS, Kim JJ, Kittleson MM, Krittanawong C, Martinez MW, Mital S, Naidu SS, Saberi S,Semsarian C, Times S, Waldman CB. 2024 AHA/ACC/AMSSM/HRS/PACES/SCMR guideline for the management of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: areport of the American Heart Association/American College of Cardiology Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2024;83(23):2324 –2405.
This article has been copublished in Circulation .
Copies: This document is available on the websites of the American College of Cardiology ( www.acc.org ) and the American Heart Association
(professional.heart.org ). For copies of this document, please contact the Elsevier Inc. Reprint Department via fax (212-633-3820) or e-mail ( reprints@
elsevier.com ).
Permissions: Multiple copies, modi ﬁcation, alteration, enhancement, and/or distribution of this document are not permitted without the express
permission of the American College of Cardiology. Requests may be completed online via the Elsevier site ( https://www.elsevier.com/about/policies-
and-standards/copyright/permissions ).JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN COLLEGE OF CARDIOLOGY VOL. 83, NO. 23, 2024
ª2024 BY THE AMERICAN HEART ASSOCIATION, INC., AND THE AMERICAN COLLEGE
OF CARDIOLOGY FOUNDATION. PUBLISHED BY ELSEVIER.

Peer Review
CommitteeMembersMark S. Link, MD, FACC, FAHA, FHRS, Chair
Anandita Agarwala, MD
Chad Asplund, MD, MPH, FAMSSM y
Michael Ayers, MD, FACCC. Anwar Chahal, MD, PhD, FACC, FHRS
Jonathan Chrispin, MD, FACC
Aarti Dalal, DO, FACC, FHRSAlejandro E. De Feria Alsina, MDJonathan Drezner, MD, FAMSSMRajesh Kabra, MD, FACC, FHRSSabeeda Kadavath, MDElizabeth S. Kaufman, MD, FACC, FAHA, FHRS zSabra Lewsey, MD, MPH, FACC
James P. MacNamara, MDAnjali Owens, MDHena Patel, MDNosheen Reza, MD, FACC #
Aldo L. Schenone, MD
Daniel Swistel, MDJose Vargas, MD
yAMSSM representative.
zHRS representative.
#ACC/AHA Joint Committee on Performance Measuresrepresentative.
AHA/ACC Joint
Committee onClinical PracticeGuidelinesJoshua A. Beckman, MD, MS, FACC, FAHA, Chair
Catherine M. Otto, MD, FACC, FAHA, Chair-Elect
Anastasia L. Armbruster, PharmD, FACC
Leslie L. Davis, PhD, ANP-BC, FACC, FAHA
Lisa de las Fuentes, MD, MS, FAHA xx
Anita Deswal, MD, MPH, FACC, FAHA xx
Victor A. Ferrari, MD, FACC, FAHA, MSCMRAdrian F. Hernandez, MD, FAHA xx
Hani Jneid, MD, FACC, FAHA, FSCAIHeather M. Johnson, MD, MS, FACC, FAHAW. Schuyler Jones, MD, FACCSadiya S. Kahn, MD, MSc, FACC, FAHAPrateeti Khazanie, MD, MPH, FAHA
Michelle M. Kittleson, MD, PhD, FACC, FAHAVenu Menon, MD, FACC, FAHADebabrata Mukherjee, MD, FACC, FAHALatha Palaniappan, MD, MS, FACC, FAHA xx
Tanveer Rab, MD, FACC
Daichi Shimbo, MDJacqueline E. Tamis-Holland, MD, FACC, FAHAY. Joseph Woo, MD, FACC, FAHABoback Ziaeian, MD, PhD, FACC, FAHA
xxFormer Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines member;
current member during the writing effort.
ABSTRACT
AIM The “2024 AHA/ACC/AMSSM/HRS/PACES/SCMR Guideline for the Management of Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy ”
provides recommendations to guide clinicians in the management of patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
METHODS A comprehensive literature search was conducted from September 14, 2022, to November 22, 2022,
encompassing studies, reviews, and other evidence on human subjects that were published in English from PubMed,EMBASE, the Cochrane Library, the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, and other selected databases relevant tothis guideline. Additional relevant studies, published through May 23, 2023, during the guideline writing process, were also
considered by the writing committee and added to the evidence tables, where appropriate.
STRUCTURE Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy remains a common genetic heart disease reported in populations globally.
Recommendations from the “2020 AHA/ACC Guideline for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Patients With Hypertrophic
Cardiomyopathy ”have been updated with new evidence to guide clinicians.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
WHAT IS NEW ................................. 2327
TOP 10 TAKE-HOME MESSAGES ................. 2328PREAMBLE .................................... 2329
1.INTRODUCTION .............................. 2330JACC VOL. 83, NO. 23, 2024 Ommen et al
JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –2405 2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline2325

1.1. Methodology and Evidence Review ......... 2330
1.2. Composition of the Writing Committee ...... 2330
1.3. Document Review and Approval ........... 2330
1.4. Scope of the Guideline .................... 2330
1.5. Class of Recommendations and
Level of Evidence ........................ 2330
1.6. Abbreviations ............................ 2331
2. DEFINITION, ETIOLOGY, CLINICAL COURSE, AND
NATURAL HISTORY ......................... 2331
2.1. Prevalence .............................. 2331
2.2. Nomenclature/Differential Diagnosis ........ 2332
2.3. De ﬁnition, Clinical Diagnosis, and Phenotype .2333
2.4. Etiology ................................ 2333
2.5. Natural History and Clinical Course ......... 2334
3. PATHOPHYSIOLOGY ........................ 2334
3.1. Left Ventricular Out ﬂow Tract Obstruction ...2334
3.2. Diastolic Dysfunction ..................... 2335
3.3. Mitral Regurgitation ...................... 2335
3.4. Myocardial Ischemia ...................... 2335
3.5. Autonomic Dysfunction ................... 2335
4. SHARED DECISION-MAKING ................. 2336
5. MULTIDISCIPLINARY HCM CENTERS .......... 2336
6. DIAGNOSIS, INITIAL EVALUATION, AND
FOLLOW-UP ............................... 2338
6.1. Clinical Diagnosis ........................ 2338
6.2. Echocardiography ........................ 2339
6.3. CMR Imaging ........................... 2341
6.4. Cardiac CT .............................. 2343
6.5. Heart Rhythm Assessment ................ 2343
6.6. Angiography and Invasive Hemodynamic
Assessment ............................. 2345
6.7. Exercise Stress Testing .................... 2346
6.8. Genetics and Family Screening ............. 2347
6.9. Individuals Who Are Genotype-Positive,
Phenotype-Negative ...................... 2351
7. SCD RISK ASSESSMENT AND PREVENTION .... 2352
7.1. SCD Risk Assessment ..................... 23527.1.1. SCD Risk Assessment in Adults
With HCM ......................... 2352
7.1.2. SCD Risk Assessment in Children and
Adolescents With HCM ............... 2354
7.2. Patient Selection for ICD Placement ......... 2355
7.3. ICD Device Selection Considerations ......... 2358
8.MANAGEMENT OF HCM ...................... 2360
8.1. Management of Symptomatic Patients With
Obstructive HCM ........................ 2360
8.1.1. Pharmacological Management of
Symptomatic Patients With
Obstructive HCM ................... 2360
8.1.2. Invasive Treatment of Symptomatic
Patients With Obstructive HCM ........ 2362
8.2. Management of Patients with Nonobstructive
HCM With Preserved EF .................. 2364
8.3. Management of Patients With HCM and
Advanced HF ........................... 2366
8.4. Management of Patients With HCM and AF ..2370
8.5. Management of Patients With HCM and
Ventricular Arrhythmias .................. 2373
9.LIFESTYLE CONSIDERATIONS FOR PATIENTS
WITH HCM ................................. 2374
9.1. Recreational Physical Activity and
Competitive Sports ....................... 2374
9.2. Occupation in Patients With HCM .......... 2376
9.3. Pregnancy in Patients With HCM ........... 2377
9.4. Patients With Comorbidities ............... 2379
10.EVIDENCE GAPS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS ...2380
10.1. Re ﬁning the Diagnosis of HCM ............ 2380
10.2. Developing Therapies to Attenuate or
Prevent Disease Progression .............. 2380
10.3. Improving Care for Nonobstructive HCM .... 2380
10.4. Improving and Expanding Risk
Strati ﬁcation ........................... 2380
10.5. Arrhythmia Management ................. 2380
10.6. Expanding Understanding of the
Genetic Architecture of HCM .............. 2380
REFERENCES ................................. 2382
APPENDIX 1
Author Relationships With Industry and
Other Entities ............................... 2400
APPENDIX 2
Reviewer Relationships With Industry andOther Entities (Comprehensive)
................ 2403Ommen et al J A C CV O L .8 3 ,N O .2 3 ,2 0 2 4
2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –24052326

WHAT IS NEW
Table 1 reﬂects recommendations that are substantially
revised from the 2020 Hypertrophic CardiomyopathyGuidelines or were drafted as new recommendations in
the 2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guidelines.
TABLE 1 What Is New: New and Substantially Revised Recommendations in the 2024 HCM Guideline *
New or
Revised 2024 Section TitleRecommendation in
2020 HCM GuidelineCOR in
2020 GuidelineRecommendation in
2024 HCM GuidelineCOR in
2024 Guideline
Revised 6.5 Heart Rhythm
AssessmentIn patients with HCM who have additional
risk factors for AF, such as left atrial
dilatation, advanced age, and NYHA
functional class III to class IV HF, and
who are eligible for anticoagulation,
extended ambulatory monitoring is
reasonable to screen for AF as part of
initial evaluation and periodic follow-up.2a In patients with HCM who are deemed to be at
high risk for developing AF based on the
presence of risk factors or as determined by a
validated risk score, and who are eligible for
anticoagulation, extended ambulatory
monitoring is recommended to screen for AF as
part of initial evaluation and annual follow-up.1
New 6.7 Exercise Stress
TestingN/A N/A In pediatric patients with HCM, regardless of
symptom status, exercise stress testing is
recommended to determine functional capacity
and to provide prognostic information.1
Revised 7.2 Patient Selection
for ICD PlacementFor patients $16 years of age with HCM and
with$1 major SCD risk factors, discussion of
the estimated 5-year sudden death risk and
mortality rates can be useful during the shared
decision-making process for ICD placement.2a For patients with HCM with $1 major SCD risk
factor, discussion of the estimated 5-year
sudden death risk and mortality rates can be
useful during the shared decision-making
process for ICD placement.2a
Revised 8.1.1 Pharmacological
Management of
Symptomatic Patients
with Obstructive
HCMFor patients with obstructive HCM who have
persistent severe symptoms attributable to
LVOTO despite beta blockers or
nondihydropyridine calcium channel blockers,
either adding disopyramide in combination with
1 of the other drugs, or SRT performed at
experienced centers, is recommended.1 For patients with obstructive HCM who have
persistent symptoms attributable to
LVOTO despite beta blockers or
nondihydropyridine calcium channel blockers,
adding a myosin inhibitor (adult patients only),
or disopyramide (in combination with an
atrioventricular nodal blocking agent), or SRT
performed at experienced centers, is
recommended.1
New 8.2 Management of
Patients With
Nonobstructive HCM
With Preserved EFN/A N/A For younger (eg, age #45 years of age) patients
with nonobstructive HCM due to a pathogenic
or likely pathogenic cardiac sarcomere genetic
variant, and a mild phenotype, valsartan may be
beneﬁcial to slow adverse cardiac remodeling.2b
New 8.3 Management of
Patients With HCM and
Advanced HFN/A N/A In patients with HCM who develop persistent
systolic dysfunction (LVEF <50%), cardiac
myosin inhibitors should be discontinued.1
Revised 9.1 Recreational
Physical Activity and
Competitive SportsFor patients with HCM, participation in
high-intensity recreational activities or
moderate- to high-intensity competitive sports
activities may be considered after a
comprehensive evaluation and shared
discussion, repeated annually with an expert
provider who conveys that the risk of sudden
death and ICD shocks may be increased, and
with the understanding that eligibility decisions
for competitive sports participation often
involve third parties (eg, team physicians,
consultants, and other institutional leadership)
acting on behalf of the schools or teams.2b For patients with HCM, participation in vigorous
recreational activities is reasonable after an
annual comprehensive evaluation and shared
decision-making with an expert professional
who balances potential bene ﬁts and risks.2a
For patients with HCM who are capable of a
high level of physical performance,
participation in competitive sports may be
considered after review by an expert provider
with experience managing athletes with HCM
who conducts an annual comprehensive
evaluation and shared decision-making that
balances potential bene ﬁts and risks.2b
New 9.1 Recreational
Physical Activity and
Competitive SportsN/A N/A For most patients with HCM, universal
restriction from vigorous physical activity
or competitive sports is not indicated.3: No Bene ﬁt
New 9.3 Pregnancy in
Patients With HCMN/A N/A In pregnant women, use of mavacamten
is contraindicated due to potential
teratogenic effects.3: Harm
*Table 1 highlights new and substantially revised practice-changing recommendations since 2020 and is not a comprehensive list of all updates in thi s guideline.
AF indicates atrial ﬁbrillation; COR, Class of Recommendation; EF, ejection fraction; HCM, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; HF, heart failure; ICD, implantable cardiove rter-de ﬁbrillator;
LVEF, left ventricular ejection fraction; LVOTO, left ventricular out ﬂow tract obstruction; N/A, not applicable; NYHA, New York Heart Association; SCD, sudden cardiac death; and SRT,
septal reduction therapy.JACC VOL. 83, NO. 23, 2024 Ommen et al
JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –2405 2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline2327

TOP 10 TAKE-HOME MESSAGES
1. Shared decision-making is essential to provide the
best clinical care. This involves thoughtful dialogue
among patients, families, and their care team in which
health care professionals present all available testingand treatment options; discuss the risks, bene ﬁts, and
applicability of those options to the individual pa-tient; and ensure the patient expresses their personalpreferences and goals to develop their treatment plan.
2. Although the primary cardiology team can initiate
evaluation,treatment,andlongitudinalcare,referralto
multidisciplinary hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM)
centers with appropriate expertise can be important tooptimizing care for patients with HCM. Challengingtreatment decisions —where reasonabl ea l t e r n a t i v e s
exist, where the strength of recommendation is weak(eg, any decision relying on a Class of Recommendation2b) or is particularly nuanced (eg, interpretation ofgenetic testing; primary prevention implantable
cardioverter-de ﬁbrillator decision-making), and for
HCM-speci ﬁc invasive procedures —may critically
bene ﬁt from involving specialized HCM centers.
3. Careful ascertainment of family history, counseling
patients with HCM about the potential for genetictransmission of HCM, and options for genetic testingare cornerstones of care. Screening ﬁrst-degree family
members of patients with HCM, using either genetic
testing, serial imaging, or electrocardiographic sur-
veillance as appropriate, can begin at any age and canbe in ﬂuenced by speci ﬁcs of the patient and family
history and family preference. Because screeningrecommendations for family members hinge on thepathogenicity of any detected variants, the reportedpathogenicity should be recon ﬁrmed every 2 to 3
years, and input from specialized HCM centers with
genetics expertise may be valuable.
4. Assessing a patient ’s risk for sudden cardiac death is
an important component of management. Integratingt h ep r e s e n c eo ra b s e n c eo fe s t a b l i s h e dr i s km a r k e r swith tools to estimate individual risk score willfacilitate the patient ’s ability to participate in
decision-making regarding implantable cardioverter-deﬁbrillator placement. These discussions should
incorporate a patient ’s personal level of risk tolerance
and their speci ﬁc treatment goals.
5. The risk factors for sudden cardiac death in children
with HCM carry different weights and componentsthan those used in adult patients. Pediatric riskstrati ﬁcation also varies with age and must account
for different body sizes. Coupled with the complexityof placing implantable cardioverter-de ﬁbrillators in
young patients with anticipated growth and a higher
risk of device complications, the threshold forimplantable cardioverter-de ﬁbrillator implantation in
children often differs from adults. These differencesare best addressed at comprehensive HCM centerswith expertise in caring for children with HCM. Newrisk calculators, speci ﬁc to children and adolescents,
have been validated and can help young patients and
their families contextualize their estimated risk ofsudden cardiac death.
6. Cardiac myosin inhibitors are now available to treat
patients with symptomatic obstructive HCM. This newclass of medication inhibits actin-myosin interaction,thus decreasing cardiac contractility and reducingleft ventricular out ﬂow tract obstruction. Mava-
camten is currently the only U.S. Food and Drug
Administration –approved agent. These agents can be
bene ﬁcial for patients with obstructive HCM who do
n o td e r i v ea d e q u a t es y m p t o m a t i cr e l i e ff r o m ﬁrst-line
drug therapy.
7. Invasive septal reduction therapies (surgical septal
myectomy and alcohol septal ablation), when per-formed by experienced HCM teams at dedicated cen-
ters, can provide safe and effective symptomatic relief
for patients with drug-refractory or severe out ﬂow
tract obstruction. Given the data on the signi ﬁcantly
improved outcomes at comprehensive HCM centers,
these decisions represent an optimal opportunity forreferral.
8. Patients with HCM and pers istent or paroxysmal atrial
ﬁbrillation have a suf ﬁciently increased risk of stroke
such that oral anticoagulation with direct-acting oral
anticoagulants (or alternatively warfarin) should beconsidered the default treatment option irrespectiveof the CHA
2DS2-VASc score. New tools to stratify risk
for incident atrial ﬁbrillation have been developed
and may assist in determ ining the frequency of
screening patients with ambulatory telemetry.Because rapid atrial ﬁbrillation is often poorly toler-
ated in patients with HCM, maintenance of sinus
rhythm and rate control are key treatment goals.
9. Exercise stress testing is particularly helpful in
determining overall exercise tolerance and for latentexercise provoked left ventricular out ﬂow tract
obstruction. Because children may not describesymptoms readily, routine exercise testing can beparticularly important for young patients.
10. Increasingly, data af ﬁrm that the bene ﬁcial effects of
exercise on general health are extended to patientswith HCM. Healthy recreational exercise (light [ <3
metabolic equivalents], moderate [3-6 metabolicequivalents], and vigorous [ >6 metabolic equivalents]
intensity levels) has not been associated withincreased risk of ventricular arrhythmia events inshort-term studies. If patients pursue rigorous exer-
cise training for the purpose of performance orOmmen et al J A C CV O L .8 3 ,N O .2 3 ,2 0 2 4
2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –24052328

competition, it is important to engage in a compre-
hensive discussion and seek input from expert HCMprofessionals regarding th e potential risks and bene-
ﬁts, to develop an individualized training plan, and to
establish a regular schedule for reevaluation.
PREAMBLE
Since 1980, the American College of Cardiology (ACC)and American Heart Association (AHA) have translatedscienti ﬁc evidence into clinical practice guidelines with
recommendations to improve cardiovascular health.These guidelines, which are based on systematic methodsto evaluate and classify evidence, provide a foundation
for the delivery of quality cardiovascular care. The ACC
and AHA sponsor the development and publication ofclinical practice guidelines without commercial support,and members volunteer their time to the writing andreview efforts. Guidelines are the of ﬁcial policy of the
ACC and AHA. For some guidelines, the ACC and AHApartner with other organizations.
Intended Use
Clinical practice guidelin es provide recommendations
applicable to patients with or at risk of developing car-diovascular disease. The focus is on medical practice inthe United States, but these guidelines are relevant topatients throughout the world. Although guidelines
may be used to inform regulatory or payer decisions,
the intent is to improve quality of care and align withpatients ’interests. Guidelines are intended to de ﬁne
practices meeting the needs of patients in most, but notall, circumstances and should not replace clinicaljudgment.
Clinical Implementation
Management, in accordance with guideline recommen-
dations, is effective only when followed by both practi-tioners and patients. Adherence to recommendations canbe enhanced by shared decision-making between clini-cians and patients, with patient engagement in selecting
interventions on the basis of individual values, prefer-
ences, and associated conditions and comorbidities.
The ACC/AHA Joint Committee on Clinical Practice
Guidelines (Joint Committee) continuously reviews, up-dates, and modi ﬁes guideline methodology on the basis of
published standards from organizations, including theInstitute of Medicine,
1,2and on the basis of internal
reevaluation. Similarly, presentation and delivery of
guidelines are reevaluated and modi ﬁed in response to
evolving technologies and other factors to optimallyfacilitate dissemination of information to health careprofessionals at the point of care.
Numerous modi ﬁcations to the guidelines have been
implemented to make them shorter and enhance “userfriendliness. ”Guidelines are written and presented in a
modular, “knowledge chunk ”format, in which each
chunk includes a table of recommendations, a brief syn-opsis, recommendation-speci ﬁcs u p p o r t i v et e x t ,a n d ,
when appropriate, ﬂow diagrams or additional tables.
Hyperlinked references are provided for each modular
knowledge chunk to facilitate quick access and review.
In recognition of the importance of cost –value consid-
erations, in certain guidelines, when appropriate andfeasible, an analysis of value for a drug, device, or inter-vention may be performed in accordance with the ACC/AHA methodology.
3
To ensure that guideline recommendations remain
current, new data will be reviewed on an ongoing basis by
the writing committee and staff. Going forward, targetedsections/knowledge chunks will be revised dynamically
after publication and timely peer review of potentiallypractice-changing science. The previous designations of“full revision ”and “focused update ”will be phased out.
For additional information and policies on guidelinedevelopment, readers may consult the ACC/AHA guideline
methodology manual
4and other methodology articles.5-7
Selection of Writing Committee Members
The Joint Committee strives to ensure that the guideline
writing committee contains requisite content expertiseand is representative of the broader cardiovascular com-
munity by selection of experts across a spectrum of
backgrounds, representing different geographic regions,sexes, races, ethnicities, inte llectual perspectives/biases,
and clinical practice settings. Organizations and profes-sional societies with related interests and expertise areinvited to participate as collaborators.
Relationships With Industry and Other Entities
The ACC and AHA have rigorous policies and methods to
ensure that documents are developed without bias orimproper in ﬂuence. The complete policy on relationships
with industry and other entities (RWI) can be foundonline .Appendix 1 of the guideline lists writing commit-
tee members ’comprehensive and relevant RWI; for the
purposes of full transparency, comprehensive and rele-vant disclosure information for the Joint Committee isalso available online.
Evidence Review and Evidence Review Committees
In developing recommendations, the writing committee
uses evidence-based methodologies that are based on allavailable data.
4,5Literature searches focus on randomized
controlled trials (RCTs) but also include registries, non-
randomized comparative and descriptive studies, caseseries, cohort studies, systematic reviews, and expertopinion. Only key ref erences are cited.
An independent evidence review committee is
commissioned when there are $1 questions deemed ofJACC VOL. 83, NO. 23, 2024 Ommen et al
JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –2405 2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline2329

utmost clinical importance and merit formal systematic
review to determine which patients are most likely tobene ﬁt from a drug, device, or treatment strategy and to
what degree. Criteria for commissioning an evidence re-view committee and formal systematic review include
absence of a current authoritative systematic review,
feasibility of de ﬁning the bene ﬁt and risk in a time frame
consistent with the writing of a guideline, relevance to asubstantial number of patients, and likelihood that theﬁndings can be translated into actionable recommenda-
tions. Evidence review committee members may includemethodologists, epidemiologists, clinicians, and bio-statisticians. Recommendations developed by the writing
committee on the basis of the systematic review are
marked “
SR”.
Guideline-Directed Management and Therapy
The term guideline-directed management and therapy
(GDMT) encompasses clinical evaluation, diagnostictesting, and both pharmacological and procedural treat-
ments. For these and all recommended drug treatment
regimens, the reader should con ﬁrm dosage with product
insert material and evaluat e for contraindications and
interactions. Recommendations are limited to drugs, de-vices, and treatments approved for clinical use in theUnited States.
Joshua A. Beckman, MD, MS, FAHA, FACC
Chair, ACC/AHA Joint Committee on
Clinical Practice Guidelines
1. INTRODUCTION
1.1. Methodology and Evidence Review
The recommendations listed in this guideline are, when-
ever possible, evidence based. An initial extensive evi-dence review, which included literature derived fromresearch involving human subjects, published in English,and indexed in MEDLINE (through PubMed), EMBASE, theCochrane Library, the Agency for Healthcare Research andQuality, and other selected databases relevant to this
guideline, was conducted from September 14, 2022, to
November 2022, and included literature published be-tween 2013 and 2022. Various published search hedgeswere used to eliminate animal studies and to locate rele-vant material that may not have been retrievable usingexisting database study type ﬁlters at the time the searches
were performed.
1-6Key search words included but were
not limited to the following: hypertrophic cardiomyopa-
thy, coronary, ischemia, systole, atrial ﬁbrillation, exer-
cise, stroke volume, transplant, magnetic resonanceimaging, sudden death, left ventricular hypertrophy,subvalvular stenosis, echocardiography, nuclear magneticresonance imaging, compute d tomographic angiography,
genetic testing, and diagnostic imaging. Additionalrelevant studies, published through May 23, 2023, during
the guideline writing process, were also considered by thewriting committee and added to the evidence tableswhen appropriate. The ﬁnal evidence tables are included
in the Online Data Supplement and summarize the
evidence used by the writi ng committee to formulate
recommendations. References selected and publishedin the present document are representative and not all-inclusive.
1.2. Composition of the Writing Committee
The writing committee consisted of clinicians, adult
cardiologists, pediatric cardiologists, interventionalists,a cardiac surgeon, and 2 lay/patient representatives.The writing committee includ ed representatives from the
ACC, AHA, American Medical S ociety for Sports Medicine,
Heart Rhythm Society, Pediatric & Congenital Electro-physiology Society, and Society for Cardiovascular Mag-netic Resonance. Appendix 1 of the current document
lists writing committee members ’comprehensive and
relevant RWI.
1.3. Document Review and Approval
The Joint Committee appoin ted a peer review committee
to review the document. The peer review committee was
composed of individuals nominated by ACC, AHA, and the
collaborating organizations. Reviewers ’RWI information
was distributed to the writing committee and is publishedinAppendix 2 .
This document was approved for publication by the
governing bodies of the ACC and the AHA and wasendorsed by American Medical Society for Sports Medi-cine, Heart Rhythm Society, Pe diatric & Congenital Elec-
trophysiology Society, and Society for Cardiovascular
Magnetic Resonance.
1.4. Scope of the Guideline
In developing the “2024 AHA/ACC/AMSSM/HRS/PACES/
SCMR Guideline for the Management of HypertrophicCardiomyopathy ”(2024 HCM guideline), the writing
committee reviewed previously published guidelines.
Table 2 contains a list of these publications and state-
ments deemed pertinent to this writing effort and isintended for use as a resource, thus obviating the need torepeat existing guideline recommendations.
1.5. Class of Recommendations and Level of Evidence
The Class of Recommendation (COR) indicates the
strength of recommendation, encompassing the esti-
mated magnitude and certainty of bene ﬁt in proportion to
r i s k .T h eL e v e lo fE v i d e n c e( L O E )r a t e st h eq u a l i t yo fscienti ﬁc evidence supporting the intervention on the
basis of the type, quantity, and consistency of data fromclinical trials and other sources ( Table 3 ).Ommen et al J A C CV O L .8 3 ,N O .2 3 ,2 0 2 4
2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –24052330

1.6. Abbreviations2. DEFINITION, ETIOLOGY, CLINICAL COURSE,
AND NATURAL HISTORY
2.1. Prevalence
HCM is a common inherited heart disease reported in
populations globally. The estimated prevalence of HCM
varies depending on whether subclinical or clinicallyevident cases are being considered, how or if the diag-n o s i si sa d j u d i c a t e d ,a n da g eo ft h es a m p l es t u d i e d .
1The
prevalence of unexplained asymptomatic hypertrophy inyoung adults in the United States has been reported in therange of 1:500.
2Symptomatic hypertrophy based on
medical claims data has been estimated at <1:3000 adults
i nt h eU n i t e dS t a t e s ;h o w e v e r ,t h et r u eb u r d e ni sm u c h
higher when unrecognized disease in the general popu-lation is considered.
3HCM is often inherited in an auto-
somal dominant pattern but does not require a familyhistory of HCM. There is equal distribution of HCM by sex,although women are diagnosed less commonly than men.Differences in prevalence have been reported by race andethnicity. Whether this dif ference is due to social dis-
parities resulting in less access to specialists for diagnosis
is unclear. As a result, these differences likely re ﬂect
underlying differences in soci al determinants of health,
such as structural inequities in access to care leading todifferences in diagnosis and aw areness. Patients who self-
identi ﬁed as Black individuals (8.3%, N ¼205) comparedTABLE 2 Associated Guidelines and Statements
Title OrganizationPublication Year
(Reference)
Guidelines
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy ACC/AHA
ESC20111
20142
20203
Atrial ﬁbrillation AHA/ACC 20144
20195
20236
Heart failure ACC/AHA 20137
20168
20229
Primary prevention AHA/ACC 201910
Management of overweight
and obesity in adultsAHA/ACC/TOS 201411
Device-based therapy for cardiac
rhythm abnormalitiesACC/AHA/HRS 201312
Ventricular arrhythmias and sudden
cardiac deathAHA/ACC/HRS 201713
Bradycardia ACC/AHA/HRS 201814
Prevention of cardiovascular disease
in womenAHA/ACC 201115
Secondary prevention and risk reduction
therapy for patients with coronaryand other atherosclerotic vascular
diseaseAHA/ACC 2011
16
Assessment of cardiovascular risk in
asymptomatic adultsACC/AHA 201017
Seventh Report of the Joint National
Committee on Prevention, Detection,
Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood
PressureNHLBI 200318
VHD statement on comprehensive
centersAATS/ACC/
ASE/SCAI/STS201919
AATS indicates American Association for Thoracic Surgery; ACC, American College of
Cardiology; AHA, American Heart Association; ASE, American Society of Echocardiog-
raphy; ESC, European Society of Cardiology; HRS, Heart Rhythm Society; NHLBI, Na-
tional Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; SCAI, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography
and Interventions; STS, Society of Thoracic Surgeons; TOS, The Obesity Society; and
VHD, valvular heart disease.
Abbreviation Meaning/Phrase
AF atrial ﬁbrillation
CAD coronary artery disease
CMR cardiovascular magnetic resonanceCPET cardiopulmonary exercise testCRT cardiac resynchronization therapyDOAC direct-acting oral anticoagulants
EF ejection fraction
ESM extended septal myectomyGDMT guideline-directed management and therapyHCM hypertrophic cardiomyopathyHF heart failure
ICD implantable cardioverter-de ﬁbrillator
Continued in the next columnAbbreviation Meaning/Phrase
LBBB left bundle branch block
LGE late gadolinium enhancement
LV left ventricularLVAD left ventricular assist deviceLVEF left ventricular ejection fractionLVH left ventricular hypertrophyLVOT left ventricular out ﬂow tract
LVOTO left ventricular out ﬂow tract obstruction
MET metabolic equivalentMR mitral regurgitationNSVT nonsustained ventricular tachycardiaNYHA New York Heart Association
RCT randomized controlled trial
RV right ventricularSAM systolic anterior motionSCAF subclinical atrial ﬁbrillation
SCD sudden cardiac death
SRT septal reduction therapy
TEE transesophageal echocardiogramTTE transthoracic echocardiogramVF ventricular ﬁbrillation
VT ventricular tachycardiaVUS variant of uncertain signi ﬁcanceJACC VOL. 83, NO. 23, 2024 Ommen et al
JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –2405 2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline2331

with White individuals had a younger mean age at diag-
n o s i s( 4 0y e a r sv e r s u s4 5 . 5y e a r s ) ,w e r em o r el i k e l yt ohave symptomatic heart failure (HF), and were less likelyto undergo genetic testing.
4Epidemiologic studies of
diverse samples are needed to better understand theinterplay between genetic and social factors in the prev-alence of HCM.
2.2. Nomenclature and Differential Diagnosis
Since the original clinical description of HCM was pre-
sented >60 years ago, various names have been used todescribe this disease, including idiopathic hypertrophic
subaortic stenosis and hypert rophic obstructive cardio-
myopathy. Because left ventricular (LV) out ﬂow tract
obstruction (LVOTO) is not invariably present, the writingcommittee recommends the term HCM (with or withoutoutﬂow tract obstruction).
In some areas, the use of HCM to describe the
increased LV wall thickness associated with systemic
disorders or secondary causes of LV hypertrophy (LVH)can lead to confusion. Systemic disorders includevarious metabolic and multiorgan syndromes such asTABLE 3Applying American College of Cardiolog y/American Heart Association Class of Recommendation and Level of Evidence to
Clinical Strategies, Interventions, Treatments, or D iagnostic Testing in Patient Care* (Updated May 2019)
Ommen et al J A C CV O L .8 3 ,N O .2 3 ,2 0 2 4
2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –24052332

RASopathies (variants in several genes involved in RAS-
MAPK signaling); mitochondrial myopathies; glycogenand lysosomal storage diseases in children; and Fabry,amyloid, sarcoid, and Danon cardiomyopathies. In thesesyndromic or in ﬁltrative diseases, although the magni-
tude and distribution of increased LV wall thickness can
be similar to that of HCM, the pathophysiologic mech-anisms responsible for hypert rophy, natural history, and
treatment strategies are not the same.
1-5For these rea-
sons, other cardiac or systemic diseases capable ofproducing LVH (ie, HCM mimics) will not be addressedin this document.
In addition, other scenarios can arise that present
diagnostic challenges. These include conditions that
produce secondary LVH, which can also overlap pheno-typically with HCM, including remodeling secondary toathletic training (ie, “athlete ’sh e a r t ”)a sw e l la s
morphologic changes related to long-standing systemichypertension (ie, hypertensive cardiomyopathy). Simi-larly, hemodynamic obstruction caused by left-sidedobstructive lesions (valvular or subvalvular stenosis) or
obstruction after antero-apical infarction and stress car-
diomyopathy can cause diagnostic dilemmas.
6,7Although
HCM cannot be de ﬁnitely excluded in such situations, a
number of clinical markers and testing strategies can beused to help differentiate between HCM and conditions ofphysiologic LVH.
2.3. De ﬁnition, Clinical Diagnosis, and Phenotype
For the purposes of this guideline, the clinical de ﬁnition
of HCM is considered a disease state in which morpho-logic expression is con ﬁned solely to the heart. It is
characterized predominantly by LVH in the absence of
another cardiac, systemic, or metabolic disease capable ofproducing the magnitude of hypertrophy evident in agiven patient and for which a disease-causing sarcomere(or sarcomere-related) variant is identi ﬁed or genetic
etiology remains unresolved. A clinical diagnosis of HCMin adult patients can therefore be established by imaging(see Section 6.1 ,“Clinical Diagnosis ”), typically with 2D
echocardiography or cardiova scular magnetic resonance
(CMR) showing a maximal end-diastolic wall thicknessof$15 mm anywhere in the left ventricle, in the
absence of another cause of hypertrophy in adults.
1-4
More limited hypertrophy (13-14 mm) can be diag-nostic when present in family members of a patientwith HCM or in conjunction with a positive genetic testidentifying a pathogenic or likely pathogenic variant
often in a sarcomere gene.
For children, the diagnosti c criteria are confounded by
needing to adjust for body size and growth. Traditionally,a body surface area adjusted z-score of $2s t a n d a r dd e -
viations above the mean has been used. This cut-offrepresents a signi ﬁcantly lower threshold than the15-mm absolute value used in adults. For reference, 15
mm represents a z-score of approximately 6 standarddeviations above the mean in adults. We propose that thediagnosis of HCM in children should therefore considerthe circumstances of screening and the pretest probability
of disease: a threshold of a z-score >2.5 may be appro-
priate to identify early HCM in asymptomatic childrenwith no family history, whereas for children with adeﬁnitive family history or a positive genetic test, a
threshold of a z-score >2m a ys u f ﬁce for early diagnosis.
The emergence of the HCM phenotype in younger familymembers who carry a pathogenic or likely pathogenicvariant without previously evident LVH at initial
screening (ie, genotype-positive/previously phenotype-
negative) is well recognized and underscores the principlethat, as the disease manifests, normal or mildly increasedLV wall thicknesses will be encountered in individualswith genetically affected status. In the absence ofincreased wall thickness, such individuals should beconsidered at risk for subsequent development of, but notyet having, clinically evident HCM.
Nearly any pattern and distribution of LV wall thick-
ening can be observed in HCM, with the basal anteriorseptum in continuity with th ea n t e r i o rf r e ew a l lt h em o s t
c o m m o nl o c a t i o nf o rL V H .I nas u b s e to fp a t i e n t s ,h y -pertrophy can be limited and focal, con ﬁned to only 1 or 2
LV segments with normal LV mass. Although common inHCM, systolic anterior motion (SAM) of the mitral valveand hyperdynamic LV function are not pathognomonic
and are not required for a clinical diagnosis. Several other
morphologic abnormalities are also not diagnostic of HCMbut can be part of the phenotypic expression of the dis-ease, including hypertrophied and apically displacedpapillary muscles, myocardial crypts, anomalous inser-tion of the papillary muscle directly in the anterior lea ﬂet
of the mitral valve (in the absence of chordae tendineae),elongated mitral valve lea ﬂets, myocardial bridging, and
right ventricular (RV) hypertrophy.
2.4. Etiology
In the early 1990s, the DNA sequencing from families with
HCM led to the discovery that damaging variants in genescoding for sarcomere proteins segregated (or were coin-herited) with LVH identi ﬁed by echocardiographic
assessment, abnormal electrocardiograms (ECGs), andphysical ﬁndings. HCM thereby became regarded as a
potentially monogenic disease, helping to consolidate aclinically heterogeneous dis ease into a single entity based
on genetic substrate.
1
Currently, variants in 1 of $8 genes encoding proteins
of the cardiac sarcomere (or sarcomere-related structures)have been implicated in causing LVH, the sine qua non ofH C M .A m o n gp a t i e n t sw i t hH C M ,a p p r o x i m a t e l y3 0 %t o60% have an identi ﬁable pathogenic or likely pathogenicJACC VOL. 83, NO. 23, 2024 Ommen et al
JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –2405 2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline2333

genetic variant. A substantial proportion of patients with
HCM are currently without any evidence of a geneticetiology to their disease, including a subgroup (up to 40%of patients in 1 study) who also have no other affectedfamily members (ie, “nonfamilial ”HCM).
2These obser-
vations suggest that other novel pathophysiologic mech-
anisms may be responsible for, or contribute to,phenotypic expression in these affected patients withHCM. Although HCM appears to be a monogenic diseasein some cases, common genetic variants have also beenidenti ﬁed as genetic modi ﬁers of disease penetrance and
–associated with risk for LVH and HCM, which suggests
both monogenic and polygenic susceptibility.
3
Among patients with HCM and a pathogenic sarcomeric
gene variant, the 2 most common genes are beta myosinheavy chain 7 ( MYH7 ) and myosin-binding protein C3
(MYBPC3 ), identi ﬁed in most patients who are variant
positive, while other genes ( TNNI3, TNNT2, TPM1, MYL2,
MYL3, ACTC1 ) each account for a small proportion of pa-
tients (1%-5%). Within these genes, most rare variantsidenti ﬁed are “private ”(unique to the individual family).
Each offspring of an affected family member has a 50%
chance of inheriting the variant.
4Although the likelihood
of developing clinical HCM is high in family memberswith a pathogenic variant, the age at which diseaseexpression occurs in a given individual as well as thedegree of expression is variable.
The precise mechanisms by which sarcomere variants
result in the clinical phenotype have not been fully
elucidated. Alterations in the sarcomere gene trigger
myocardial changes, leading to hypertrophy and ﬁbrosis,
which ultimately results in a small, stiff ventricle withimpaired systolic and diastolic performance despite apreserved left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF). Simi-larly, abnormal sarcomeric proteins may not be solelyresponsible for all of the clinical characteristics observedin patients with HCM. Diverse d isease features including
abnormal intramural corona ry arteries responsible for
s m a l lv e s s e li s c h e m i a ,e l o n g a t e dm i t r a lv a l v el e a ﬂets, and
congenital anomalies of the submitral valve apparatus,which are widely recognized components of the HCMphenotype, appear to have no known direct associationwith sarcomere variants.
2.5. Natural History and Clinical Course
Although HCM can be compatible with normal life ex-
pectancy without limiting symptoms or the need for ma-jor treatments in most patients, many patients can
experience signi ﬁcant consequences that are attributable
to the disease. To this point, there is increasing recogni-tion of patients with HCM identi ﬁed clinically at >60
years of age with little to no disability. Yet, a multicenterregistry report has suggested that the lifelong risk ofadverse events (eg, mortality, HF, stroke, ventriculararrhythmia, atrial ﬁbrillation [AF]) caused by HCM may be
greater among patients with pathogenic or likelypathogenic sarcomeric gene variants or those diagnosedearly in life.
1The large number and diversity of the
HCM-associated variants do not allow the speci ﬁcg e n o -
type to be used to inform the anticipated outcomes in
individual patients.
Among referral-based cohorts of patients with HCM,
many will experience adverse e vents, including: (1) sud-
den death events; (2) progressive limiting symptomsbecause of LVOTO or diastolic dysfunction; (3) HF symp-toms associated with systolic dysfunction; and (4) AFwith risk of thromboembolic st roke. Nevertheless, studies
reporting relatively long-te rm outcomes in patients with
HCM have demonstrated that for patients at risk for, orwho develop one of these disease-related complications,the application of contemporary cardiovascular therapies
and interventions has signi ﬁcantly lowered HCM mortal-
ity rates.
2,3One of the major treatment initiatives
responsible for lowering the mortality rate has been theevolution of sudden cardi ac death (SCD) risk strati ﬁcation
strategies based on several major noninvasive risk
markers that can identify adult patients with HCM atgreatest risk for sudden death who are then candidates forimplantable cardioverter-de ﬁbrillator (ICD) placement.
T h ed e c r e a s ei ns u d d e nd e a t hr a t e si nH C Ma p p e a r sn o wto have shifted focus to HF and complications of AF as thepredominant cause of disease-related morbidity andmortality and, therefore, the greatest unmet treatment
need in adults. Risk for adverse events in HCM, particu-
larly for HF, are likely due to the complex interplay ofgenetics with environmenta lf a c t o r s ,s u c ha so b e s i t y ,
hypertension, sleep apnea, and diabetes.
4Among pa-
tients with HCM, cardiometabolic risk factors (eg, obesity,hypertension, diabetes, obstructive sleep apnea) arehighly prevalent and are associated with poorer prog-nosis, highlighting the importance of intensive risk factor
modi ﬁcation of traditional risk factors.
3. PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
The pathophysiology of HCM consists of dynamic LVOTO,
mitral regurgitation (MR), diastolic dysfunction, myocar-dial ischemia, arrhythmias, metabolic and energetic ab-normalities, and potentially autonomic dysfunction. For a
given patient with HCM, the clinical outcome may be
dominated by one of these components or may be theresult of a complex interplay. Thus, the potential pres-ence of such abnormalities should be considered withcomprehensive clinical evaluation and their impactaddressed in the management of these patients.
3.1. Left Ventricular Out ﬂow Tract Obstruction
LVOTO, either at rest or with provocation, is present in a
signi ﬁcant proportion of patients with HCM
1andOmmen et al J A C CV O L .8 3 ,N O .2 3 ,2 0 2 4
2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –24052334

primarily caused by SAM of the mitral valve. Obstruction
is considered present if peak LVOT gradient is $30
mm Hg. Resting or provoked gradients $50 mm Hg are
generally considered capab le of causing symptoms and,
therefore, are the threshold for contemplating advanced
pharmacological or invasive therapies if symptoms are
refractory to standard management.
LVOTO in HCM is dynamic and sensitive to ventricular
preload, afterload, and contractility.2Thus, gradients
vary with heart rate, blood pressure, volume status, ac-t i v i t y ,m e d i c a t i o n s ,f o o d ,a n da l c o h o li n t a k e .
3,4Provoca-
tive maneuvers are recommended if minimal gradients(ie,<30 mm Hg) are observed at rest. Maneuvers include
standing, Valsalva strain, or exercise with simultaneous
auscultation or echocardiography.
5-9Using dobutamine to
identify latent LVOTO and eligibility for advanced thera-pies is not advised due to lack of speci ﬁcity.
10
The site and characteristics of obstruction should be
identi ﬁed. Management will change depending on
whether the obstruction is deemed to be valvular, dynamicLVOTO, ﬁxed subvalvular, or midcavitary due to hyper-
trophied/anomalous papillary muscles and/or hyper-
dynamic LV function with systolic cavity obliteration. Ifclinical and echocardiographic ﬁndings are discordant,
invasive assessment for LVOTO may be helpful.
11
3.2. Diastolic Dysfunction
Altered ventricular load with high intracavitary pres-
sures, impaired LV compliance from hypertrophy andﬁbrosis, altered energetics, m icrovascular ischemia, and
delayed inactivation from abnormal intracellular cal-
cium reuptake are features of HCM that contribute to
diastolic dysfunction.
1-3Additionally, impaired relaxa-
tion can be identi ﬁed in young sarcomere gene variant
carriers with normal LV wall thickness, suggesting thatd i a s t o l i ca b n o r m a l i t i e sc a nb ea ne a r l ym a n i f e s t a t i o no fpathogenic sarcomere variants.
4In some patients,
increased stiffness and severe hypertrophy signi ﬁcantly
compromise ventricular cavity size and stroke volume
and may result in restrictive physiology. Diastolic
dysfunction can contribute to decreased exercise ca-pacity and adverse prognosis independent ofLVOTO.
2,5,6Determining if exercise intolerance or
symptoms are due to diastolic dysfunction may requireinvasive testing. With impaired ventricular myocardialrelaxation, greater dependency on the atrial systole forventricular ﬁlling may occur, leading to poor tolerance
of AF or similar arrhythmias in some patients.
3.3. Mitral Regurgitation
MR can occur secondarily from SAM or primarily from
leaﬂet abnormalities and, regardless of etiology, can
contribute to symptom burden. Common primary abnor-malities of the mitral valve in patients with HCM includeexcessive lea ﬂet length, anomalous papillary muscle
insertion, and anteriorly displaced papillary muscles.
1-3
MR jet characteristics can provide insight to etiology asMR caused by SAM is typically mid-to-late systolic intiming and posterior or lateral in orientation, owing to the
anterior distortion of the mitral valve and compromised
leaﬂet coaptation.
4However, central and anterior jets may
also result from SAM of the mitral valve. For patients inwhom invasive septal reduction therapy (SRT) is beingcontemplated, close examination of the mitral valve isrequired to determine the op timal invasive approach and
potential need for concomitant mitral valveintervention.
5,6
Factors that affect the severity of LVOTO may also
affect the degree of MR, thus imaging should be per-formed at rest and with provocation. Additionally, varia-tion in the degree of MR may underlie some of thev a r i a t i o ni ns y m p t o m sr e p o r t e db yp a t i e n t s .
3.4. Myocardial Ischemia
Patients with HCM may be susceptible to myocardial
ischemia due to potential mismatch between myocardialoxygen supply and demand. Myocardial hypertrophy,microvascular dysfunction with impaired coronary ﬂow
reserve, and medial hypertrophy and reduced density of
the intramural arterioles are common ﬁndings in HCM.
1,2
These abnormalities may be exacerbated by the pres-
ence of hyperdynamic systolic function and LVOTO withhigh intracavitary pressures.
3,4Blunted coronary ﬂow
reserve occurs even without epi cardial stenosis, although
the presence of concomitant severe coronary atheroscle-r o s i se x a c e r b a t e sm i s m a t c ha n di sa s s o c i a t e dw i t hapoorer prognosis.
5Apical myocardial ischemia and injury
(with or without midventricular obstruction) may be one
of the mechanisms that contributes to the development ofLV apical aneurysms, which may carry increased risk ofHF, stroke, and ventricular arrhythmias.
6,7Myocardial
bridging, a congenital anomaly whereby a bridge ofoverlying myocardium causes systolic compression of anepicardial coronary artery that can persist into diastole,may impair blood ﬂow and may rarely cause myocardial
ischemia in a subset of patients.
8-12
3.5. Autonomic Dysfunction
Patients with HCM may have autonomic dysfunction,
with impaired heart rate recovery and inappropriatevasodilatation.
1-4The prevalence of autonomic dysfunc-
tion in HCM is uncertain, although studies have described
an abnormal blood pressure response to exercise in
approximately 25% of patients.2-4Whether these ﬁndings
were due to pure autonomic dysfunction, LVOTO, orother conditions is unclear. Currently, no speci ﬁcr e c -
ommendations exist for assessment or treatment ofautonomic dysfunction in patients with HCM.JACC VOL. 83, NO. 23, 2024 Ommen et al
JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –2405 2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline2335

4. SHARED DECISION-MAKING
Synopsis
Shared decision-making is a dialogue that allows pa-
tients, families, and health care professionals to worktogether to select options tha t fully consider the input,
values, and preferences for the patient. This approach has
been shown to improve con ﬁdence in clinical decisions
a n di m p r o v e dh e a l t ho u t c o m e s .
6Although shared
decision-making discussions should be the default inter-action between patients (or their families in the case of anaffected minor) and their care teams, the biggest oppor-tunities are those areas where there are complex path-ways that vary by the individual patient.Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. In the management of HCM, decisions around genetic
testing, ICD implantation, advanced therapies for reliefof LVOTO, and participation in competitive or high-intensity exercise are particularly critical for thesecrucial dialogues. Some of these discussions and de-cisions could also repres ent opportunities where
referral to centers with more comprehensive experi-
ence are most appropriate and highly impactful (as
described in detail in Section 5 ,“Multidisciplinary
HCM Centers ”).
5. MULTIDISCIPLINARY HCM CENTERSRecommendation for Shared Decision-Making
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
1 B-NR1. For patients with HCM or at risk for HCM, shared dec ision-making is recommended in developing a plan of
care (including, but not limited to, de cisions regarding genetic evaluation , activity, lifestyle, and therapy
choices) that includes a full disclosure of the risks, bene ﬁts, and anticipated outcomes of all options, as
well the opportunity for the patient and care givers to express their goals and concerns.1-5
Recommendations for Multidisciplinary HCM Centers
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 C-LD1. In patients with HCM in whom SRT is indicated, t he procedure should be performed at experienced
centers (comprehensive or prima ry HCM centers) with demonstrated excellence in clinical outcomes
for these procedures ( Tables 4 and 5).1-3
2a C-LD2. In patients with HCM, consultation with or referral to a comprehensive or primary HCM center is
reasonable to aid in complex disease -related management decisions ( Table 4 ).4-14
Synopsis
The specialized needs, complex and evolving clinical
management, and the relatively uncommon prevalence ofHCM in many clinical practices have created a greater
demand and need for clinica l HCM centers with HCM-
speci ﬁc competencies similar to that proposed for the
management of patients with valvular heart disease.
5-7,15
The main goal of the HCM centers ’framework is to opti-
mize care and counseling of patients with HCM and theirfamilies. The proposed approach recognizes that a spec-trum of expertise exists and is inclusive of roles for car-diologists working outside of HCM centers, those working
in primary HCM centers, and those working at fully
comprehensive HCM centers. Cardiologists practicingoutside of HCM centers have a critical role in many aspects
of HCM management ( Table 4 ) including, but not limited
to, providing ready access fo r initial and surveillance
testing, treatment recommendations, and availability for
rapid assessment when a patient ’s disease course changes.
Referral to HCM centers can help to con ﬁrm diagnosis,
provide genetic counseling and testing, advise regardingmore advanced treatment decisions, and provide patientswith access to the highest level of longitudinal carepossible for their disease.
7
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. When performed in centers with limited experience and
low procedural volume, invasive SRTs for relief of LVOTOOmmen et al J A C CV O L .8 3 ,N O .2 3 ,2 0 2 4
2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –24052336

are associated with increased mortality and morbidity
rates, as well as mitral valve replacement.1-3,16,17
Strong consideration should therefore be given to referral
of patients with obstructive HCM who are candidates forinvasive SRTs to established high-volume primary orcomprehensive HCM centers, which can perform these
procedures with optimal safety and bene ﬁt outcomes. Pri-
mary HCM centers that perform invasive SRTs shouldensure outcomes for safety and bene ﬁt, commensurate with
that reported from comprehensive HCM centers ( Tables 4
and 5 ). If only one of the invasive SRT options is available
at a given center, patients should be fully informed ofalternative options, including the pros and cons of bothprocedures and the possibility for referral to a comprehen-
sive HCM center that offers all treatment options to ensure
appropriate patient participation in the decision-making.
2. Given the unique needs of patients with HCM in clinical
c a r d i o v a s c u l a rp r a c t i c e ,a sw e l la st h es p e c i a l i z e dtraining and interpretation associated with many of theprocedures and testing for this complex condition,challenging management decision-making can arise forwhich referral to or consultation with an HCM center
would be reasonable.
4-13Referral to a comprehensive
HCM center should speci ﬁcally be considered for those
patients with HCM who are candidates for any proced-ure that requires specialized expertise, including com-plex invasive SRTs,
3,8,9catheter ablation for ventricular
and complex atrial tachyarrhythmias,10,11and advanced
HF therapies, including transplant.12,13In addition,
referral to a comprehensive HCM center can aid in
complex disease-related management decisions
including, but not limited to, genetic counseling, chal-
lenging primary prevention ICD decision-making, aswell as counseling patients with HCM on sportsparticipation.
4TABLE 4Suggested Competencies of Comprehensive and
Primary HCM Centers
Potential HCM Care
Delivery CompetenciesComprehensive
HCM CenterPrimary
HCM
CenterReferring
Centers and
Physicians
Diagnosis X X XInitial and surveillance TTE X X X
Advanced echocardiographic
imaging to detect latent LVOTOXX
Echocardiography to guide SRT X *
CMR imaging for diagnosis and risk
strati ﬁcationXX
Invasive evaluation for LVOTO X **
Coronary angiography X X XStress testing for elicitation of
LVOTO or consideration of
advanced HF therapies and
transplantXX
Counseling and performing family
screening (imaging and
genetic)XX X
Genetic testing and counseling X X *
SCD risk assessment X X XCOR 1 and COR 2a ICD decision-
making with adult patientsXX X
COR 2b ICD decision-making with
adult patientsX
ICD implantation (adults) X X *
ICD decision-making and
implantation with children and
adolescents and their parents
and caregiversX *
Initial AF management and stroke
preventionXX X
AF catheter ablation X X *
Initial management of HFrEF and
HFpEFXX X
Advanced HF management (eg,
transplantation, CRT)X *
Pharmacological therapy for HCM X X X
Invasive management of
symptomatic obstructive HCMX †
Counseling occupational and
healthy living choices otherthan high-intensity or
competitive activitiesXX X
Counseling options on participation
in high-intensity or competitive
athleticsX
Managing women with HCM
through pregnancyX *
Management of comorbidities X X X
*Optional depending on the core competencies of the institution.
†If these procedures are performed, adequate quality assurance should be in place to
demonstrate outcomes consistent with that achieved by comprehensive centers.
AF indicates atrial ﬁbrillation; CMR, cardiovascular magnetic resonance; COR, Class of
Recommendation; CRT, cardiac resynchronization therapy; HCM, hypertrophic cardio-
myopathy; HF, heart failure; HFpEF, heart failure with preserved ejection fraction;HFrEF, heart failure with reduced ejection fraction; ICD, implantable cardioverter-
deﬁbrillator; LVOTO, left ventricular out ﬂow tract obstruction; SCD, sudden cardiac
death; SRT, septal reduction therapy; and TTE, transthoracic echocardiography.TABLE 5Targets for Invasive Septal Reduction Therapies
Outcomes
Rate (%)
MyectomyAlcohol Septal
Ablation
30-d mortality #1 #1
30-d adverse complications (tamponade, LAD
dissection, infection, major bleeding)#5 #5
30-d complete heart block resulting in need for
permanent pacemaker#5 #10
Mitral valve replacement within 1 y #5
More than moderate residual mitral regurgitation #5 #5
Repeat procedure rate #3 #10
Symptomatic improvement (eg, $1 NYHA
functional class)>90 >90
Rest and provoked LVOT gradient <50 mm Hg >90 >90
LAD indicates left anterior descending; LVOT, left ventricular out ﬂow tract; and NYHA,
New York Heart Association.JACC VOL. 83, NO. 23, 2024 Ommen et al
JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –2405 2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline2337

6. DIAGNOSIS, INITIAL EVALUATION, AND
FOLLOW-UP
6.1. Clinical Diagnosis
Synopsis
Clinical evaluation for HCM may be triggered by the
identi ﬁcation of a family history of HCM; by symptoms
including a cardiac event; b y detection of a heart murmur
during physical examination; during an echocardio-
graphic examination performed for other indications; or
by abnormal results on a 12-lead ECG. A proper clinicalevaluation should begin with a comprehensive cardiachistory, a family history including 3 generations, and acomprehensive physical exam ination (including maneu-
vers such as Valsalva, squat-to-stand, passive leg raising,or walking). This should be followed by an ECG and car-diac imaging to identify LVH when clinical ﬁndings are
suggestive.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Many patients with HCM are asymptomatic and are
identi ﬁed incidentally or as a result of screening. Clinical
history includes a detailed cardiac history and familyhistory (3 generations) to identify relatives with HCM orunexpected or sudden death. Assessment of overallﬁtness and functional capacity, and symptoms in
response to exertion —chest pain, dyspnea, palpitations,
and syncope —should also be performed. Associated
syndromic or systemic and extracardiac symptoms ororgan involvement are also documented. Alternativeetiologies should be excl uded, including athletic
remodeling, uncontrolled hypertension, renal disease,or inﬁltrative diseases. In neona tes, a history of maternal
g e s t a t i o n a ld i a b e t e ss h o u l db ec o n s i d e r e da n d ,i n
infants <1yearofage, excludesystemicdisease( Table 6 ).Recommendation for Clinical Diagnosis
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
1 B-NR1. In patients with suspected HCM, comprehensive physical examination and complete medical and 3-
generation family history is recommended as part of the initial diagnostic assessment ( Tables 6 and 7).1-6
TABLE 6Clinical Features in Patients With HCM
Phenocopies (Mimics)
Typical
Presentation AgeSystemic
Features Possible EtiologyDiagnostic
Approach
Infants (0-12 mo)
and toddlersDysmorphic
features,
failure to
thrive,metabolic
acidosisnRASopathies
nGlycogen
storage dis-
eases, other
metabolic or
mitochondrial
diseases
nInfant of a
mother with
diabetesnGeneticist
assessment
nNewborn
metabolic
screening
nSpeci ﬁcm e t a -
bolic assays
nGenetic testing
Early childhood Delayed or
abnormal
cognitivedevelopment,
visual or
hearing
impairmentnRASopathies
nMitochondrial
diseasesnBiochemical
screening
nGenetic testing
Youth and
adolescenceSkeletal muscle
weakness or
movement
disordernFriedreich ’s
ataxia
nDanon disease
nMitochondrial
diseasenBiochemical
screening
nNeuromuscular
assessment
nGenetic testing
Adulthood Movement
disorder,
peripheral
neuropathy,
renaldysfunctionnAnderson-
Fabry disease
nFriedreich ’s
ataxia
ninﬁltrative
disorders (eg,amyloidosis)
nGlycogen
storagediseases
nMitochondrial
diseasenBiochemical
screening
nNeuromuscular
assessment
nGenetic testing
HCM indicates hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.TABLE 7Screening With Electrocardiography and
2D Echocardiography in AsymptomaticFamily Members *
Age of First-Degree
Relative Initiation of ScreeningRepeat
ECG, Echo
Pediatric
Children and adolescents
from genotype-positive
families, and families
with early onset diseaseAt the time HCM is diagnosed in
another family memberEvery 1-2 y
All other children and
adolescentsAt any time after HCM is
diagnosed in a family member
but no later than pubertyEvery 2-3 y
Adults At the time HCM is diagnosed in
another family memberEvery 3-5 y
*Includes all asymptomatic, phenotype-negative, ﬁrst-degree relatives deemed to be at
risk for developing HCM based on family history or genotype status and may sometimes
include more distant relatives based on clinical judgment. Screening interval may be
modiﬁed (eg, at onset of new symptoms or in families with a malignant clinical course or
late-onset HCM).
ECG indicates electrocardiogram; Echo, echocardiogram; and HCM, hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy.Ommen et al J A C CV O L .8 3 ,N O .2 3 ,2 0 2 4
2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –24052338

Classically, patients with HCM have a harsh
crescendo-decrescendo systolic murmur often dueto SAM of the mitral valve with LVOTO, prominentapical point of maximal impulse, abnormal carotidpulse, and a fourth heart sound. Presence of out ﬂow
tract obstruction should be sought at rest and with
provocative maneuvers when possible (Valsalvamaneuver, standing from the squatting position).SAM related to an elongated anterior mitral valve
leaﬂet and papillary muscle ab normalities may result
in lea ﬂet separation or poor coaptation with poste-
riorly directed MR in late systole over the mitralposition. Those without LVOTO (provocable or
resting) may have a normal physical examination.
1-6
6.2. Echocardiography
Recommendations for Echocardiography
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In patients with suspected HCM, a transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) is recommended in the initial
evaluation.1-6
1B-NR (children)2. In patients with HCM who have no change in clinical status or events, repeat TTE is recommended every
1 to 2 years to assess the degree of myocardial hypertrophy, dynamic LVOTO, MR, and myocardial function
(Figure 1 ).7-14C-LD (adults)
1 B-NR3. For patients with HCM who experience a change in cl inical status or a new clinical event, repeat TTE is
recommended.9,14-17
1 B-NR4. For patients with HCM and resting peak LVOT gradient <50 mm Hg, a TTE with provocative maneuvers is
recommended.18-21
1 B-NR5. For symptomatic patients with HCM who do not have a resting or provocable out ﬂow tract peak gradient ‡50
mm Hg on TTE, exercise TTE is recommended for the detection and quanti ﬁcation of dynamic LVOTO.20-25
1 B-NR6. For patients with HCM who are undergoing surgical septal myectomy, intraop erative transesophageal
echocardiogram (TEE) is recommended to assess mitral valve anatomy and function and adequacy of septal
myectomy.26-29
1 B-NR7. For patients with HCM who are undergoing alcoho l septal ablation, TTE or intraoperative TEE with
intracoronary ultrasound-enhancing c ontrast injection of the candidate ’s septal perforator(s) is recom-
mended.30-34
1 B-NR8. For patients with HCM who have undergone SRT, TT E within 3 to 6 months after the procedure is rec-
ommended to evaluate the procedural results.35-38
1 B-NR9. Screening: In ﬁrst-degree relatives of patients with HCM, a TTE is recommended as part of initial family
screening and peri odic follow-up ( Figure 1 ,Table 7 ).3-5,7,14,32
1 B-NR10. Screening: In individuals who are genotype-positi ve, phenotype-negative, echocardiography is recom-
mended at periodic intervals depending on age (1-2 year s in children and adolescents, 3-5 years in adults)
and change in clinical status ( Figure 1 ,Table 7 ).39-43
2a C-LD11. For patients with HCM, TEE can be useful if TTE is in conclusive in clinical de cision-making regarding
medical therapy, and in situations such as planning for myectomy, excl usion of subaortic membrane or MR
secondary to structural abnormalities of the mitral valve apparatus, or in the assessment of the feasibility
of alcohol septal ablation.26-29
2a B-NR12. For patients with HCM in whom the diagnosis of apic al HCM, apical aneurysm, or atypical patterns of
hypertrophy is inconclusive on TTE, the use of an intra venous ultrasound-enhanc ing agent is reasonable,
particularly if other imaging modalities such as CM R are not readily available or are contraindicated.44,45
2a C-LD13. For asymptomatic patients with HCM w ho do not have a resting or provocable out ﬂow tract peak
gradient ‡50 mm Hg on standard TTE, exercise TTE is reasonable for the detection and quanti ﬁcation of
dynamic LVOTO.15,19,20,22-25JACC VOL. 83, NO. 23, 2024 Ommen et al
JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –2405 2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline2339

Synopsis
Cardiac imaging has an essential role in the diagnosis
and clinical decision-making for patients with HCM.Echocardiography is the primary imaging modality inmost patients, with CMR imaging offering complementary
information and as an alternative to echocardiography for
selected patients in whom the echocardiogram is incon-clusive. Important information to be gained from imagingincludes establishing the diagnosis (or excluding alter-native diagnoses), evaluating the severity of the pheno-type, and evaluating for concomitant structural andfunctional cardiac abnormalities (eg, systolic, diastolic,valvular function). Characterization of dynamic LVOTO,
including the integral role of the mitral valve, is a key
strength of echocardiography. Documentation of themaximal wall thickness, cardiac chamber dimensions,systolic function, and the presence of LV apical aneurysmall inform phenotype severity and SCD risk strati ﬁcation.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Comprehensive 2D echocardiography has a primary
role in establishing the diagnosis of HCM, determining
hypertrophy pattern, presence of LV apical aneu-rysms, LV systolic and diastolic function, mitral valvefunction, and presence and severity of LVOTO.
1-6
2. Routine follow-up of patients with HCM is an impor-
tant part of optimal care. In asymptomatic patients,serial TTE, performed every 1 to 2 years, can helpassess for changes in LV systolic and diastolic func-
t i o n ,w a l lt h i c k n e s s ,c h a m b e rs i z e ,L V O T O ,a n d
concomitant valvular disease. This interval may beextended in patients who rem ain clinically stable after
multiple evaluations.
7-14
3. Changes in signs or symptoms in patients with HCM
are often attributable to progression of the hemody-namics of HCM, or the development of new concom-itant cardiovascular abnormalities, such as valvular
heart disease. Echocardiography is the primary imag-
ing modality to assess these changes in patients withnew or worsening symptoms.
9,14-17
4. LVOT gradients are dynamic, in ﬂuenced by loading
conditions, and recumbent r esting echocardiography
tends to underestimate the presence and severity ofambulatory LVOTO, with up to 50% of patients withobstructive physiology being identi ﬁed on resting
echocardiography. If the resting gradient is <50
mm Hg, it is essential to perform provocative ma-neuvers such as sustained Valsalva or squat-to-stand(or simply standing) maneuvers to uncover the pres-ence of LVOTO, which may inform the care of the in-dividual.
15,18-21Provocative maneuvers may not be as
helpful in children, who often cannot cooperate withthese maneuvers.5. In general, to attribute effort-related symptoms to
LVOTO, the resting or provoked gradient would needto be>50 mm Hg. LVOT gradients can be dynamic and
c a nb em i s s e do nr e s t i n ge c h o c a r d i o g r a p h yi nu pt o50% of patients with obstructive physiology.
16Ma-
neuvers performed during a resting TTE to provoke an
LVOT gradient (eg, Valsalva) can be variable becauseof inconsistencies in instruction and patient effort.Stress echocardiography (focusing on LVOTO ratherthan regional wall motion), representing the mostphysiologic form of provocation, can be most helpfulfor those patients where the presence or severity ofLVOTO is uncertain after the baseline echocardio-
gram.
20,22-25Postprandial exercise may also be useful,
particularly if the patient expresses increased symp-toms after meals.
46Exercise testing is only useful in
older children, typically >7t o8y e a r so fa g e ,o rw h e n
the child is able to cooperate with testing, becauseyoung children are often unable to cooperate withexercise testing.
6. Intraoperative TEE is a standard part of surgical
myectomy and adjunctive repairs for patients with
HCM. TEE can assess mitral valve abnormalities andMR and extent of septal hypertrophy, as well as pro-vide assessment of residual SAM of the mitral valveand LVOTO and occurrence of a ventricular septaldefect or new aortic insuf ﬁciency.
26-29
7. TTE or TEE imaging helps guide alcohol septal abla-
tion, particularly in localizing the appropriate left
anterior descending septal perforator by intra-
coronary contrast injectio na sw e l la sm o n i t o r i n go f
LVOT gradient reduction during the procedure. Theuse of transthoracic guidance with ultrasound-enhancing agents has result ed in greater procedural
success, decreased intervention time, smaller infarctsize, and lower heart block rates.
6,30-34In cases where
transthoracic image quality is suboptimal, intra-
procedural TEE with ultrasound-enhancing agents
can be used to guide septal ablation therapy.6,34
8. Following SRT, ef ﬁcacy of therapy, particularly evi-
dence of septal thinning and LVOT gradient decrease,s h o u l db ea s s e s s e d .R e s i d u a lS A Mo ft h em i t r a lv a l v eand MR, aortic insuf ﬁciency, LV systolic and diastolic
function, and ventricular septal defect should also beassessed. Although these results are usually apparent
immediately after surgical septal myectomy, changes
in LVOTO and formation of a myocardial septal scarmay evolve over time (typically complete in 3 monthsbut in some patients may persist for a year) afterseptal ablation.
35,37,38,47,48
9. When a diagnosis of HCM is made in a proband,
echocardiographic screening of ﬁrst-degree relatives
is offered to identify affected relatives. In 2 largeOmmen et al J A C CV O L .8 3 ,N O .2 3 ,2 0 2 4
2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –24052340

pediatric studies, yield on echocardiographic
screening for clinical HCM in ﬁrst-degree relatives was
10% to 15% throughout childhood and adolescencewith similar disease rates of penetrance across agerange.
12,39,40The median age at HCM onset was 8.9
(4.7-13.4) years, with earlier onset in male individuals,
those with family history of SCD, and pathogenicvariants in MYH7/MYBPC3.
39Likewise, the median
time from HCM onset to a major cardiac event,including death, SCD, or cardiac intervention (eg,myectomy, ICD), was 1.5 years.
39,40,49Taken together,
these data support family screening initiated inchildhood and repeated on a periodic basis in children
and adults ( Table 7 ). Changes in LV systolic strain and
diastolic function can precede de ﬁnitive hypertro-
phy.
50-52Family members with these abnormalities
likely warrant closer follow-up.
10. The ongoing screening of genotype-positive, pheno-
type-negative family members of all ages is impor-tant. Previous small studies reported onset of clinicalHCM in adolescence or young adulthood for most
genotype-positive cases.
2,53However, large studies
suggest that clinical HCM can develop in youngerfamily members, with 5% to 10% being phenotype-positive at ﬁrst screening and another 3% to 5%
before 18 years of age. Phenotype conversion canoccur in young adults; therefore, continued screeninginto adulthood is warranted, although frequency ofscreening can be lowered because the penetrance rateis lower in individuals who are >18 years of age.
39-43
Although an absence of systematic evidence is
observed, most physicians c ontinue clinic al screening
until midlife (approximately 50 years of age) becausedisease can manifest in adults, albeit at a lower
frequency.
11. TEE can be particularly useful if there is uncertainty
regarding mitral valve st ructural abnormalities,
mechanism of MR, or suspicion of alternate causes ofoutﬂow obstruction (discrete subaortic stenosis,
valvular stenosis) on TTE or suspected or by otherclinical parameters.
29
1 2 .I np a t i e n t sw i t hH C M ,L V Hc a nb el o c a l i z e dt oa n y
segment of the LV wall, and care should be taken to
completely image all LV wall segments. In caseswhere the LV apex is suboptimally visualized, use ofan ultrasound-enhancing agent or CMR imaging canaid in detection of apical hypertrophy, aneurysm, andthrombus.
44,45
13. In patients who are asymptomatic, understanding
whether they have LVOTO at rest or provocation is
important in understanding the potential pathophys-
iology. Even in asymptomatic patients, knowing thatthey have provocable obstruction can in ﬂuence health
advice (eg, regarding hydra tion) or choice of therapies
for concomitant conditions (eg, diuretics or vasodila-tors for patients with hypertension).
20,22-25
6.3. CMR Imaging
Recommendations for CMR Imaging
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. For patients suspected of having HCM in whom echoc ardiography is inconclusive, CMR imaging is indi-
cated for diagnostic clari ﬁcation.1-7
1 B-NR2. For patients with LVH in whom there is a susp icion of alternative diagnoses, including in ﬁltrative or
storage disease as well as athlete ’sh e a r t ,C M Ri m a g i n gi su s e f u l( Figure 1 ).1-7
1 B-NR3. For patients with HCM who are not otherwise identi ﬁed as high risk for SCD, or in whom a decision to
proceed with ICD remains uncertain after clinical ass essment that includes personal or family history,
echocardiography, and ambulatory electroca rdiographic monitoring, CMR imaging is bene ﬁcial to assess
for maximum LV wall thickness, EF, LV apical ane urysm, and extent of myocardial replacement ﬁbrosis
with late gadolinium enhancement (LGE).1-15
1 B-NR4. For patients with obstructive HCM in whom the anato mic mechanism of obstruction is inconclusive on
echocardiography, CMR imaging is indicated to inform the selection and planning of SRT.16-20
2b C-EO5. For patients with HCM, repeat contrast-enhanced CMR imaging on a periodic basis (every 3-5 years) for
the purpose of SCD risk strati ﬁcation may be considered to evaluate changes in LGE and other
morphologic changes, including EF, developm ent of apical aneurysm, or LV wall thickness ( Figure 1 ,
Table 8 ).JACC VOL. 83, NO. 23, 2024 Ommen et al
JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –2405 2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline2341

Synopsis
CMR imaging provides high spatial resolution and
tomographic imaging of the heart and assessment ofmyocardial replacement ﬁbrosis (LGE) after contrast
administration.
1,2These attributes make CMR imaging
well-suited for characterizing the diverse phenotypic ex-
pressions of HCM. CMR imaging is therefore a comple-mentary imaging technique in the evaluation of HCMpatients for diagnosis, risk prediction, and preproceduralplanning for SRT.
1,7
CMR imaging produces images with sharp contrast be-
tween the blood pool and myocardium. This allows foraccurate LV wall thicknes s measurements, quanti ﬁcation
of LV and RV chamber size, LV mass, systolic function, and
identi ﬁcation of LVH not well visualized by echocardiog-
raphy.
1-7In addition, optimal images of LV apical aneu-
rysms and structural abnormalities of the mitral valve andsubvalvular apparatus that contribute to LVOTO are pro-duced, which may impact management strategies.
7-9,16-19
Extensive LGE (ie, myocardial replacement ﬁbrosis) rep-
resents a noninvasive marker for increased risk for poten-
tially life-threatening ventr icular tachyarrhythmias and
progression to systolic dysfunction.11-14CMR imaging may
not be feasible in certain patients because of availability,cost, contraindications attrib utable to pacemakers or ICDs,
severe renal insuf ﬁciency, and patient factors (pediatric
age and a requirement for general anesthesia, or sedation,claustrophobia, or body habitus).
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. For patients in whom HCM is suspected based on car-
diac symptoms, an abnormal 12-lead ECG, or familyhistory of inherited heart disease, and in whom echo-cardiographic examination is nondiagnostic or incon-clusive, CMR imaging is an important adjunctive test toclarify diagnosis.
1-7In such clinical situations, CMR
imaging can identify focal areas of LVH, particularly
when hypertrophy is con ﬁned to certain regions of the
LV wall, including the anterolateral wall, posteriorseptum, and apex. This increased sensitivity indetecting LVH by CMR imaging is attributable to highspatial resolution and the fact that CMR imaging is notencumbered by poor acoustic windows caused bypulmonary or thoracic parenchyma.
4-6
2. Important differences in the pattern and location of
LVH, cavity dimensions, and the pattern and distribu-
tion of LGE can aid in the differentiation of HCM fromother cardiovascular diseases associated with LVH,including other inherited cardiomyopathies (eg, lyso-somal or glycogen storage diseases), in ﬁltrative car-
diomyopathies (eg, amyloid), or conditions withsecondary hypertrophy attributable to pressure over-load (eg, hypertension or athletic conditioning).
73 . M a x i m a lL Vw a l lt h i c k n e s sm e a s u r e m e n t sc a nb e
underestimated (or overestimated) with echocardiog-raphy compared with CMR imaging.
1-7This can have
direct management implications for diagnosis and SCDrisk assessment, because LV wall thickness is a major
risk marker for SCD.
4-6,10I na d d i t i o n ,a p i c a la n e u r y s m s
may not always be detected by echocardiography.8,9
Extensive LGE, often occupying multiple LV seg-
ments, is associated with increased risk for life-threatening ventricular arrhythmias, independent oflocation or pattern within the LV wall.
11-13Studies have
promoted a threshold for extensive LGE of $15% of the
LV mass as representing a signi ﬁcant (2-fold) increase
in SCD risk.12However, no consensus on the optimal
quanti ﬁcation technique(s) has been determined. LGE
can serve as an arbiter in decision-making on whetherto pursue ICD placement when risk remains ambiguousafter standard risk strati ﬁcation.
12Patients with HCM
and systolic dysfunction (EF <50%), adverse LV
remodeling with ventricula r cavity enlargement and
wall thinning because of scarring, are at increased risk
for lethal ventricular tachyarrhythmias and increased
HF symptoms.14,15CMR can provide quantitative EF
assessment in whom determination of systolic func-tion remains uncertain with echocardiography.Absence of (or minimal) LGE is associated with lowerrisk of SCD.
12,13,21
4. Because of speci ﬁca n a t o m i cf e a t u r e so ft h eL V O T ,
some patients with HCM will be more suitable candi-
dates for septal myectomy than for percutaneousalcohol ablation.
16-20CMR imaging can reliably char-
acterize speci ﬁc features of the LVOT anatomy that
may be contributing to SAM-septal contact andobstructive physiology and, therefore, are relevant tostrategic planning for septa l reduction procedures,
including precise distribution of septal hypertrophy,
abnormalities of the mitral valve and subvalvular
apparatus, including abnormally positioned papillarymuscles, anomalous papillary muscle insertion directly
into mitral valve, accessory muscle bundles, andabnormal chordal connections, particularly if thesemorphologic features are not clearly identi ﬁed with
echocardiography.
16-20
5. The progression of high-risk morphologic features,
including apical aneurysm, extensive LGE, systolicdysfunction, and massive LVH, is not well-de ﬁned.
Nevertheless, given the importance of these in man-agement considerations, including SCD preventionwith ICD therapy, periodic longitudinal evaluation
with CMR imaging to detect development or pro-
gression in $1o ft h e s ei s s u e sm a yb e
informative.
8,10,15,22,23Ommen et al J A C CV O L .8 3 ,N O .2 3 ,2 0 2 4
2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –24052342

6.4. Cardiac CT
Recommendation for Cardiac CT
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
2b C-LD1. In adult patients with suspected HCM, cardiac CT may be considered for diagnosis if the echocardiogram is
not diagnostic and CMR imaging is unavailable.1-3
Synopsis
Cardiac CT provides excellent spatial resolution that
allows for clear de ﬁnition of LV structure (including hy-
pertrophy pattern, wall thickness measurement, detectionof subaortic membrane, and intracardiac thrombus) andfunction. Small studies have demonstrated the ability ofCT to assess myocardial ﬁbrosis, although this adds
further radiation exposure an d needs further validation.
2,3
In addition to myocardial structure, CT can provide an
assessment of coronary anatomy, including stenosis and
anomalous origin of coronary arteries. Disadvantagesof CT are the use of radiation and radioiodine contrastand inferior temporal resolution compared withechocardiography. CT angiography is discussed in
Section 6.6 (“Angiography and Invasive Hemodynamic
Assessment ”).
Recommendation-Speci ﬁcS u p p o r t i v eT e x t
1. Although not commonly used, CT can provide impor-
tant insights when echocardiography is technicallylimited and CMR imaging is contraindicated or unavai-lable and is one of the tools that can be used to de ﬁne
coronary anatomy.
1-3
6.5. Heart Rhythm Assessment
Recommendations for Heart Rhythm Assessment
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In patients with HCM, a 12-lead ECG is recommended in the initial evaluation and as part of periodic
follow-up (every 1-2 years) ( Figure 1 ,Table 7 ).1-3
1 B-NR2. In patients with HCM, 24- to 48-hour ambulatory ele ctrocardiographic monitoring is recommended in the
initial evaluation and as part of periodic follow-up ( every 1-2 years) to identify pa tients who are at risk for
SCD and to guide management of arrhythmias ( Figure 1 ).4-6
1 B-NR3. In patients with HCM who develop palpi tations or lightheadedness, extended ( >24 hours) electrocar-
diographic monitoring or event recording is re commended for arrhythmia diagnosis and clinical
correlation.6
1 B-NR4. In ﬁr s t - d e g r e er e l a t i v e so fp a t i e n t sw i t hH C M ,a1 2 -lead ECG is recommended as a component of the
screening algorithm ( Figure 1 ,Table 7).1-3
1 B-NR5. In patients with HCM who are deemed to be at high r isk for developing AF based on the presence of risk
factors or as determined by a validated risk score, a nd who are eligible for anticoagulation, extended
ambulatory monitoring is recommended to screen for AF as part of initial evaluation and annual follow-up
(Figure 1 ).7-12
2b B-NR6. In adult patients with HCM without risk factors for A F and who are eligible for anticoagulation, extended
ambulatory monitoring may be considered to assess for asymptomatic paroxysmal AF as part of initial
evaluation and periodic follow-up (every 1-2 years).7-12JACC VOL. 83, NO. 23, 2024 Ommen et al
JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –2405 2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline2343

Synopsis
Both 12-lead electrocardiographic and ambulatory
monitoring are necessary for p atients with HCM. A 12-lead
ECG can convey information about LVH and repolariza-tion abnormalities as well as arrhythmias, including
bradycardia and tachycardia. It also provides information
about conduction abnormalities that may be present atinitial evaluation or in follow-up. Ambulatory monitoringis necessary in the evaluation of SCD risk. Historically,this has been 24 to 48 hours. Extended monitoring is mostuseful for the determination of the cause of symptoms orto diagnose AF. In patients with additional risk factors,periodic screening of AF may be necessary in order to
intervene promptly.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. The 12-lead ECG is abnormal in 75% to 95% of patients
with phenotypic HCM, including, but not limited to,evidence for LVH and repolarization changes. However,these abnormalities do not reliably correlate with theseverity or pattern of hypertrophy.
13The 12-lead ECG is
also useful in identifying other abnormalities, such as
Wolff-Parkinson-White pattern, which may suggestcertain phenocopies of HCM.
1-3Alternative diagnoses
may also be suggested, such as amyloidosis in thepresence of low-voltage and conduction delays. Inaddition, a pseudo-myocardial infarction pattern maybe present in young individuals before there is manifestevidence of wall thickening on echocardiography.
13A12-
lead ECG is commonly used in the screening for HCM,
including family members without LVH.1-3There is
considerable debate regarding the utilization of the 12-lead ECG in screening healthy adolescents for HCM aspart of preparticipation athletic screening.
14
2. Ambulatory electrocardiographic monitoring for
detection of ventricular tachyarrhythmias has histori-cally played an important role in risk strati ﬁcation of
patients with HCM. Episodes of nonsustained ventric-
ular tachycardia (NSVT) may identify patients atsigni ﬁcantly higher risk of subsequent SCD.
4-6There is
increasing evidence that NSVT in young patients withHCM is more prognostic for SCD than in patients >35
years of age, and also that longer and faster NSVT isassociated with greater inc idence of ICD-treated ar-
rhythmias.
15There is also evidence that longer periods
of monitoring will diagnose more episodes of NSVT16;
however, NSVT as a risk factor for SCD has historicallybeen based on a 24- to 48-hour monitor. The optimaltime frame of monitoring is not yet established and,thus, at this time, it is reasonable to perform serialambulatory electrocardiog raphic monitoring every 1 to
2 years in patients who do not have ICDs.
3. In the presence of symptoms, ambulatory electrocar-
diographic monitoring should be continued until apatient has symptoms while wearing the monitor, such
that the proper diagnosis is made. Clinical studies haveshown a broad spectrum of arrhythmias in patientswith HCM, most of them not lethal; thus, clinical cor-relation of symptoms with monitor ﬁndings is essen-
tial.
6In some patients with infrequent symptoms,
portable event monitors or implantable monitors maybe warranted.
4 .E C G sa r ec o n s i d e r e dt ob ea standard part of the initial
screening of relatives of patients with HCM.
1-3Elec-
trocardiographic abnormalities may precede thedevelopment of LVH in children who are gene carriers;thus, ECG is considered more sensitive than
echocardiography as a screening tool in families with
HCM.
13
5. AF is associated with adverse outcomes (including
stroke) in patients with HCM. Although severalstudies show that asymptomatic AF is present in upto 50% of patients,
7-11it is unclear that asymptom-
atic episodes, especially if short in duration ( <30
seconds) and low burden ( <1%), contribute to
adverse outcomes. Predictors of clinically important
AF include left atrial dilatation, increasing age,duration of disease, and NYHA functional class III toIV HF. Thus, patients with these characteristicsshould be assessed more frequently and possiblyincluding extended (durati on determined by clinical
circumstances) ambulatory electrocardiographicscreening to provide prompt intervention when AF is
detected. To facilitate identifying patients who
would bene ﬁt the most from screening, a risk score
(the HCM-AF score) was developed that includes theaforementioned risk factors and allows prognosticestimation of the risk of developing AF. The modelwas developed from a cohort of 1900 patients withHCM and subsequently validated; in the develop-ment cohort, 17.2% of high -risk patients developed
AF (rate 3.4% per year), whereas in the external
validation cohort, 13.3% of high-risk patients devel-oped AF (rate 2.7% per year).
12In the HCM-AF score
study, AF was de ﬁned as $1 clinically overt episodes
documented by ECG or telemetry, requiring medicalattention and consideration for treatment within 10years of initial visit.
12
6. AF is associated with adverse outcomes (including
stroke) in patients with HCM. Although several studies
show that asymptomatic AF is present in up to 50% ofpatients,
7-11it is unclear whether asymptomatic epi-
sodes, especially if short in duration, contribute toadverse outcomes. Predictors of AF include left atrialdilatation, advanced age, and NYHA functional class IIIto class IV HF. Yet, in patients without risk factors, therisk of developing AF is low, although not zero:
approximately 3.3% at 5 years.
12Ommen et al J A C CV O L .8 3 ,N O .2 3 ,2 0 2 4
2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –24052344

6.6. Angiography and Invasive Hemodynamic Assessment
Synopsis
Echocardiography remains the gold standard for the
reliable, noninvasive assessment of dynamic out ﬂow
tract obstruction in HCM. Invasive hemodynamic
assessment should be undertaken only when the diag-
nostic information cannot be obtained from the clinicaland noninvasive imaging examinations and when suchinformation will alter patient management. In addition,invasive hemodynamic assessment can be useful toguide management in carefu lly selected patients with
HCM who have persistent symptoms despite optimalmedical therapy to more fully characterize the hemody-
namic pro ﬁle, presence or absence of LVOTO, and
contribution of other disease states, such as chronicprimary or secondary pulmonary hypertension orconcomitant valve disease. It is crucial that the operatorperforming the assessment be experienced in such casesand use appropriate catheters (eg, end-hole pigtail,halo), while avoiding pitfalls such as catheterentrapment.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. In patients with a clinical history of signi ﬁcant,
limiting HF symptoms (NYHA functional class II toIV) but in whom there is ambiguity regarding pres-ence or magnitude of an LVOT gradient on cardiacimaging, invasive hemodynamic studies can clarifythe presence of resting or latent out ﬂow tract
obstruction as well as provide information on cardiac
output and ﬁlling pressures.
1,2Such circumstances
may arise if the reliability of echocardiographic im-aging is limited by poor acoustic windows or if theDoppler pro ﬁle cannot be reliably distinguished be-
tween increased velocity from out ﬂow tract obstruc-
tion versus contamination of the pro ﬁle by MR.Outﬂow gradients can be extremely dynamic, with
spontaneous variability in ﬂuenced by altered
myocardial contractility an d loading conditions at the
time of cardiac imaging testing.
2Several provocative
maneuvers have been used in the catheterization
laboratory to identify the presence of a latentgradient, including Valsalva maneuver, inducing apremature ventricular contraction to assess for theBrockenbrough-Braunwald- Morrow sign (post-extra-
systolic augmentation in LVOT gradient and reduc-t i o ni na o r t i cp u l s ep r e s s u r e ) ,o ru p p e ro rl o w e rextremity exercise.
3,4Documentation of the LVOT
gradient at rest and, if not severe ( $50 mm Hg), after
provocative maneuvers he lps guide clinical care.
2. Chest discomfort is a common symptom in patients
with HCM. For those patien ts with atherosclerotic
coronary risk factors or in whom chest pain does notrespond to medical therapy, the possibility of epicar-dial coronary artery disease (CAD) needs to be consid-ered. Epicardial CAD may also be suspected based on
noninvasive testing, although high false-positive and
false-negative rates are associated with nuclear andechocardiographic stress t esting. Coronary angiog-
r a p h yi su s e f u li np a t i e n t sw i t hH C Mw h e n ﬁndings of
CAD could aid in patient management.
6
3. Coronary angiography is usually performed in patients
who are scheduled for surgical myectomy and have riskfactors for coronary atherosclerosis and signi ﬁcant
myocardial bridging. Findings of extensive CAD would
inform decision-making regarding altering the strategyto surgical myectomy combined with coronary bypasssurgery.
6Coronary angiog raphy is a requisite compo-
nent of alcohol septal ablation, to assess septal anat-o m y ,a n df o rt h ep r e s e n c eo fC A Dt h a tc a nb ea d d r e s s e dat the time of septal ablation.Recommendations for Angiography a nd Invasive Hemodynamic Assessment
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. For patients with symptomatic HCM for whom there is uncertainty regarding the presence or severity of
LVOTO on noninvasive imaging studie s, invasive hemodynamic assessment with cardiac catheterization is
recommended.1-4
1 B-NR2. In patients with HCM who have symptoms or eviden ce of myocardial ischemia, coronary angiography
(CT or invasive) is recommended.5
1 B-NR3. In patients with HCM who are at risk of coronary athero sclerosis, coronary angiography (CT or invasive) is
recommended before surgical myectomy.6JACC VOL. 83, NO. 23, 2024 Ommen et al
JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –2405 2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline2345

6.7. Exercise Stress Testing
Synopsis
In patients with HCM, exerci se stress testing is safe and
provides information on the severity and mechanism offunctional limitation. Particularly when combined withsimultaneous analysis of respiratory gases (ie, cardiopul-monary exercise test [CPET]), lower exercise capacity is
strongly prognostic of adverse events, including death,
HF, and ventricular arrhythmias in both adults and chil-dren. The accuracy of exercise testing in assessingmyocardial ischemia can be limited if there are restingECG and/or wall motion abnormalities. Conversely,myocardial perfusion imaging using single-photon orpositron emission tomography has a high rate of false-positive ﬁn d i n g sf o re p i c a r d i a lC A D ,w i t hp e r f u s i o na b -
normalities detectable in >50% of patients, most of whom
have no signi ﬁcant epicardial CAD. In patients with HCM
with a high clinical suspicion for myocardial ischemia,coronary angiography (CT or invasive) should be consid-ered. Dobutamine is not recommended because diag-nostic accuracy for ischemia is limited and induction ofintracavitary gradients is nonphysiologic. This sectionfocuses only on the modality of exercise stress testing for
its utility in detecting latent LVOT obstruction and exer-
cise capacity as it relates to prognosis and treatmentrecommendations.Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. In general, to attribute effort-related symptoms to
LVOTO, the resting or provoked gradient would needto be>50 mm Hg. LVOT gradients can be dynamic and
can be missed on resting echocardiography in up to50% of patients with obstructive physiology,
17and
maneuvers performed during a resting TTE to provokean LVOT gradient (eg, Valsalva) can be variable
because of inconsistencies in instruction and patient
effort. Stress echocardiography, representing the mostphysiologic form of provocation, can be most helpfulfor those patients where the presence or severity ofLVOTO is uncertain after the baseline echocardio-gram.
1,3-6Postprandial exercise may also be useful,
particularly if the patient expresses increased symp-toms after meals.
18Exercise testing is only useful in
older children, typically >7t o8y e a r so fa g e ,o rw h e n
able to cooperate with the testing protocol.
2. CPET is a standard part of the evaluation for patients
with severe symptoms, including those being consid-ered for cardiac transplantation.
7-9
3. In pediatric patients with HCM, there is a strong asso-
ciation of exercise-induced ischemic electrocardio-graphic changes and abnormal blood pressure responseRecommendations for Exercise Stress Testing
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. For symptomatic patients with HCM who do not have resting or provocable out ﬂow tract peak
gradient ‡50 mm Hg on TTE, exercise TTE is recommended for the detection and quanti ﬁcation of
dynamic LVOTO.1-6
1 B-NR2. In patients with nonobstructive HCM and advanced H F (NYHA functional class III to class IV), cardio-
pulmonary exercise stress testing should be performed to quantify the degree of functional limitation
and aid in selection of patients for heart transpl antation or mechanical circulatory support.7-9
1 B-NR3. In pediatric patients with HCM, regardless of sympt om status, exercise stress testing is recommended to
determine functional capacity and to provide prognostic information.10
2a B-NR4. In adult patients with HCM, exercise stress testing is reasonable to determine functional capacity and to
provide prognostic information as part of initial evaluation.9,11,12
2a C-LD5. For asymptomatic patients with HCM wh o do not have a resting or provocable out ﬂow tract peak
gradient ‡50 mm Hg on standard TTE, exercise TTE is reasonable for the detection and quanti ﬁcation of
dynamic LVOTO.1,3-6,13,14
2b C-LD6. In patients with obstructive HCM and ambiguous functional capacity, exercise stress testing may be
reasonable to guide therapy ( Figure 1 ).15,16
2b C-EO7. In patients with HCM for whom it is unclear if their functional capacity has declined, exercise stress
testing may be considered every 2 to 3 years ( Figure 1 ).Ommen et al J A C CV O L .8 3 ,N O .2 3 ,2 0 2 4
2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –24052346

with lower transplant-free survival.10Exercise-induced
ischemia in pediatric patients is also independentlyassociated with a higher risk of SCD. Exercise testing isonly useful in older children, typically >7t o8y e a r so f
age, or when able to cooperate with the testing
protocol.
4. Exercise stress testing provides information on the
severity and mechanism of functional limitation (eg,provocable LVOTO, abnormal blood pressure response,chronotropic incompetence, arrhythmias, ischemia,and/or reduced heart rate reserve). When available, theuse of CPET, with simultaneous measurement of res-piratory gases, is preferred. Data from >9,000 patients
show that reduced peak oxygen consumption and
submaximal exercise parame ters, such as ventilatory
efﬁciency and anaerobic threshold, are associated with
a higher rate of ventricular arrhythmias, progression toadvanced HF, and higher all-cause mortality.
9,11,12
5. In patients who are asy mptomatic, understanding
whether they have LVOTO at rest or provocation isimportant in understanding the potential pathophysi-
ology. Even in asymptomatic patients, knowing thatthey have provocable obstruction can in ﬂuence health
advice (eg, regarding hydra tion) or choice of therapies
for concomitant conditions (eg, diuretics or vasodila-tors for patients with hypertension).
1,3-6
6. In patients with symptomatic LVOTO who are under-
going septal myectomy, lower preoperative peak VO 2
and lack of improvement in peak VO 2postoperatively
despite resolution of LVOTO are associated with highermortality.
15,16Therefore, signi ﬁcantly reduced exercise
capacity measured with or without use of CPETcompared with the norm for the patient ’sa g ea n ds e x
may prompt earlier consideration for advanced thera-pies to alleviate LVOTO.
7. A decline in exercise capacity relative to the norm for a
patient ’s age and sex can impact decisions on whether
to escalate therapies, particularly if the patient ’s func-
tional capacity is ambiguous based on their clinicalhistory.
6.8. Genetics and Family Screening
Recommendations for Genetics and Family Screening
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In patients with HCM, evaluation of familial inherita nce, including a 3-generati on family history, is rec-
ommended as part of the initial assessment.1-7
1 B-NR2. In patients with HCM, genetic testing is bene ﬁcial to elucidate the genetic basis to facilitate the iden-
tiﬁcation of family members at risk for developing HCM (cascade testing).8-11
1 B-NR3. In patients with an atypical clinical presentation of HCM or when another genetic condition is suspected
to be the cause, a workup including genetic testin g for HCM and other genetic causes of unexplained
cardiac hypertrophy ( “HCM phenocopies ”) is recommended.12-14
1 B-NR4. In patients with HCM, genetic counseling by an expert in the genetics of cardiovascular disease is rec-
ommended so that risks, bene ﬁts, test results, and their clinical signi ﬁcance can be reviewed and dis-
cussed with the patient in a shared decision-making process.1-3,15
1 B-NR5 .W h e np e r f o r m i n gg e n e t i ct e s t i n gi nap r o b a n dw i t hH CM, the initial tier of genes tested should include
genes with strong evidence to be disease-causing in HCM. *8,11,16,17
1 B-NR6. In ﬁrst-degree relatives of patients with HCM, both c linical screening (ECG and 2D echocardiogram) and
cascade genetic testing (when a pathogenic /likely pathogenic variant has been identi ﬁed in the proband)
should be offered.3,7,12,18-20
1 B-NR7. In families where a sudden unexplained death has occurred with a postmortem diagnosis of HCM,
postmortem genetic testing is bene ﬁcial to facilitate cascade genetic testing and clinical screening in
ﬁrst-degree relatives.21,22
1 B-NR8. In patients with HCM who have undergone genetic tes ting, serial reevaluation of the clinical signi ﬁcance
of the variant(s) identi ﬁed is recommended to assess for variant reclassi ﬁcation, which may impact
diagnosis and cascade genetic testing in family members23-25(Figures 1 and 2).
1 B-NR9. In affected families with HCM, preconception and p renatal reproductive and genetic counseling should
be offered.1-3,15JACC VOL. 83, NO. 23, 2024 Ommen et al
JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –2405 2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline2347

Synopsis
Genetic testing has an important role in the diagnosis
and management of HCM in pati ents and their families.
HCM is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait in mostcases, with offspring having a 50% chance of inheriting the
same disease-causing genetic variant. A discussion about
the role of genetic testing is c onsidered a standard part of
the clinical engagement of patients with HCM, includingappropriate pre- and posttest genetic counseling per-formed either by a trained cardiac genetic counselor or bysomeone knowledgeable in the genetics of cardiovasculardisease. It is essential to obtain a multigenerational (pref-erably at least 3 generations) family history of HCM and
suspected SCD events. The importance of potential psy-
chological, social, legal, ethical, and professional implica-tions of having a genetic disease
33should be conveyed.
Genetic assessment should ideally be performed in aspecialized multidisciplinary HCM center with experiencein all aspects of the genetic counseling and testing process.
1
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Obtaining a family history facilitates the identi ﬁcation
of other clinically affected and at-risk family mem-bers, patterns of disease transmission, consanguinitywithin the family, and a history of SCD in a relative.These ﬁndings may be relevant to the diagnosis and
management of individuals with HCM in the familyand subsequent clinical and genetic screening of at-risk family members.
23-25
2. Genetic testing in HCM has several clinical bene ﬁts,
including con ﬁrmation of the diagnosis, preclinical
diagnosis, cascade genetic testing in the family, and inguiding reproductive decisions.
8-11Cascade genetic
testing in the family identi ﬁes those who carry the
disease-causing variant and require ongoing surveil-lance, while those who do n ot carry the variant can be
released from lifelong clinical surveillance.
3. Genes associated with HCM phenocopies may be
included in ﬁrst-tier genetic testing if there is clinicalsuspicion based on phenotype evaluation of a sys-
temic disorder, including PRKAG2 (glycogen storage
disease), LAMP2 (Danon disease),
13GLA (Fabry dis-
ease),34transthyretin amyloid cardiomyopathy, and
disease genes related to RASopathies. In some cir-
cumstances, the genetic test result may alter the
management of the index case, such as enzymereplacement therapy in patients with Fabry disease ormore aggressive clinical management of patients withDanon disease.
4. Pretest genetic counseling is important to ensure the
patient undergoing genetic testing fully understandsa n di si n f o r m e do ft h eb e n e ﬁts and potential harms
(including psychosocial, ethical, and insurability) of
ﬁnding a genetic cause of disease. Posttest genetic
counseling allows a clear explanation to be providedfor the genetic testing ﬁndings, regardless of whether
a pathogenic or likely pathogenic variant is identi ﬁed,
and the implications of both a positive and a negativeresult for the individual and for the family.
1-3,15
5. HCM is predominantly a disease of the sarcomere, and
ﬁrst-line genetic testing primarily includes panel
testing for genes with strong evidence for being dis-ease-causing.
11Genetic testing can be performed us-
ing various platforms, including gene panels, exomesequencing, or genome sequencing.
9Gene panels
include 8 sarcomere genes, including MYH7 ,MYBPC3 ,
TNNI3 ,TNNT2 ,TPM1 ,MYL2 ,MYL3 ,a n d ACTC1 ,a n d
identify a disease-causing variant in approximately
30% of sporadic and 60% of familial cases.4,8-10
Expanding to larger panels usually does not add
diagnostic value.8,17Initial genetic testing is usually
performed in the index case (proband).8If targeted
gene panel testing does not reveal a causal variant,exome sequencing may provide a second-tier test on aclinical or research basis, recognizing the chance ofincidental ﬁndings. In up to 40% of patients with
HCM, no sarcomere variant is identi ﬁed, and there is
no family history of disease.
26Identi ﬁcation of a VUS2b B-NR10. In adult patients with HCM, the usefulness of genetic testing in the assessment of risk of SCD is
uncertain.10,25-27
2b B-NR11. In patients with HCM who have a variant of uncertain signi ﬁcance (VUS), the usefulness of clinical
genetic testing of phenotype-negative relatives for the purpose of variant reclassi ﬁcation is
uncertain.4,7,8,28
3: No bene ﬁt B-NR12. For patients with HCM who have undergone genetic testing and were found to have no pathogenic
variants (ie, harbor only benign or likely benign var iants), cascade genetic testing of the family is not
useful.4,8-10
3: No bene ﬁt B-NR13. Ongoing clinical screening is not indicated in gen otype-negative relatives i n families with genotype-
positive HCM, unless the disease-causing variant is downgraded to a VUS, likely benign, or benign
variant during follow-up.23,29-32
*Strong evidence HCM genes include, at the time of this publication: MYH7, MYBPC3, TNNI3, TNNT2, TPM1, MYL2, MYL3 , and ACTC1 .Ommen et al J A C CV O L .8 3 ,N O .2 3 ,2 0 2 4
2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –24052348

is not a clinically actionable result but can be inves-
tigated further at either a clinical or research level tofurther clarify variant pathogenicity (eg, throughcosegregation analysis in family members, DNAtesting in parents to determine whether VUS is de
novo, functional studies) ( Figures 1 and 2 ).
6. After genetic testing, a cli nically actionable result (ie,
likely pathogenic or pathogenic) can provide diag-nostic clari ﬁcation in the proband and offers the po-
tential for cascade (predictive) testing of at-risk familymembers.
3,7,12,18,19Cascade testing involves targeted
testing of ﬁrst-degree relatives for the pathogenic or
likely pathogenic variant found in the proband. When
cascade testing is performed in an at-risk relative,
those who are found not to carry the disease-causinggene variant can be released from further (lifelong)clinical surveillance. Tho se who are found to carry the
disease-causing gene variant should undergo clinicalscreening at regular intervals ( Table 7 ). Family mem-
bers of a patient where genetic testing is not done or isnegative (ie, no likely pathogenic or pathogenic
variant is identi ﬁed) also require clinical screening at
regular intervals because there is considerablephenotypic heterogeneity in age of onset and diseaseprogression within members of the same family.
7. Postmortem testing for HCM-associated variants us-
ing blood or tissue collected at autopsy has been re-ported, particularly in instances where the familyvariant is unknown and no other affected family
members are still living.
21,35,36Access to a molecular
autopsy as well as considerations related to costs andinsurance coverage for this testing can vary betweenjurisdictions. Nevertheless, identi ﬁcation of a likely
pathogenic or pathogenic variant not only con ﬁrms
the diagnosis of HCM but allows cascade genetictesting of other at-risk relatives as outlined previously(Figures 1 and 2 ).
8. Determining pathogeni city of variants relies on a
weight of collective evidence based on AmericanCollege of Medical Genetics and Genomics criteria
16
and may change over time. This highlights theimportance of periodic reev aluation of variants every
few years in case the variant has been reclassi ﬁed (ie,
either upgraded to likely pathogenic or pathogenic),in which case family cascade genetic testing can be
initiated, or downgraded to a VUS, likely benign, or
benign variant, whereby family screening wouldrevert to regular clin ical surveillance.
23-25In 1 report,
11% of HCM variants were either downgraded orupgraded over 6 years into a category that wouldnecessitate a change in cascade screening of familymembers.
29This highlights the importance of having
the necessary expertise within a specialized multi-
disciplinary clinic setting to not only perform genetictesting and interpret the results but to reevaluate the
pathogenicity of variants during follow-up.23,24The
American College of Medical Genetics and Genomicsguidelines recommend clinical laboratories imple-ment policies to reevaluate variants based on new
information about the patient or family phenotype.
32
The American College of Medical Genetics and Geno-
mics also highlights the importance of notifying apatient undergoing genetic testing that the geneticinterpretation may change over time, and that thep a t i e n tm a yb er e c o n t a c t e dw i t hu p d a t e dr e s u l t s .
31
9. In autosomal dominant HCM, there is a 1 in 2 (50%)
chance of passing on the disease-causing gene variant
to each offspring of an affected individual, although
variable penetrance can result in differences in onsetand severity of clinical manifestations.
37Prenatal ge-
netic counseling is helpful in explaining the risk oftransmission of disease, as well as discussing poten-tial reproductive options.
1-3,15These options include
in vitro fertilization with preimplantation geneticdiagnosis, prenatal genetic screening, and postnatal
genetic testing. The bene ﬁts and potential harms can
be discussed for each of these options, such that theindividual or couple can make a fully informeddecision.
10. Although some evidence exists that adults who carry
>1 likely pathogenic or pathogenic variant may have
more severe disease, including SCD, the role of theg e n e t i ct e s tr e s u l ti nt h ed e t e r m i n a t i o no fr i s ki nS C D
remains uncertain and is therefore not clinically used
for this purpose. Similarly, a genetic result in isolationdoes not in ﬂuence decisions related to implanting an
ICD in adult patients with HCM. Several studies havereported that patients with HCM who carry patho-genic or likely pathogenic sarcomere variants have aworse prognosis compared with patients with HCMwho are sarcomere variant-negative.
10,12,25,27,38This
includes earlier onset of disease, higher incidence of
SCD, higher incidence of AF and ventricular arrhyth-mias, HF, and overall mortality.
10,12,25,27,38In pediatric
patients, the presence of sarcomeric variants is moreclosely associated with SCD and has been incorpo-rated into one of the SCD risk tools.
38
11. Genetic testing for HCM is ﬁrst performed in an indi-
vidual in the family with clear phenotypic evidence of
HCM, usually the proband (index case). If a de ﬁnitive
likely pathogenic or pathogenic variant is identi ﬁed,
then cascade genetic testin g in at-risk relatives can be
offered ( Figures 1 and 2 ). Genetic testing in a
phenotype-negative relative without a known geneticdiagnosis in the proband has a very low yield of iden-tifying a genetic cause of HCM, and a negative testin this situation will not change recommendations
for ongoing clinical screening.
4,7,8,28Identi ﬁcation ofJACC VOL. 83, NO. 23, 2024 Ommen et al
JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –2405 2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline2349

a VUS in a proband is not a clinically actionable
result. In select circumstances only, family membertesting may be offered at eit her a clinical or research
level to further clarify the pathogenicity of thevariant (eg, through cosegregation analysis in family
members, determine de novo status through
parental testing, functional studies). However, thisis most appropriate in the setting of guidance from acardiovascular genetics expert ( Figures 1 and 2 ).
12. If genetic testing does n ot identify a pathogenic
v a r i a n ti nap a t i e n tw i t hH C M( i e ,o n l yi d e n t i ﬁes
benign or likely benign variants), there is no indica-tion to do genetic testing in family members as theidenti ﬁcation of such variants will not change clinical
management, including the need for continued clin-ical screening.
4,8-10
13. In genotype-negative relatives of individuals with
genotype-positive HCM, no further clinical follow-up
is required ( Figures 1 and 2 ). Over time, as more
knowledge is gained, some variants previouslythought to be likely pathogenic or pathogenic may bedowngraded to a VUS or benign category.
23,29,30In
such instances, family relatives who were releasedfrom clinical surveillance on the basis of the previousgene result need to be noti ﬁed and regular clinical
screening recommenced.
31,32
FIGURE 1 Recommended Evaluation and Testing for HCM
Colors correspond to Table 3 . *The interval may be extended, particularly in adult patients who remain stable after multiple evaluations. AF indicates atrial ﬁbrillation;
CMR, cardiovascular magnetic resonance; CPET, cardiopulmonary exercise test; ECG, electrocardiography/electrocardiogram; echo, echocardiog raphy/echocardiogram;
HCM, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; HF, heart failure; ICD, implantable cardioverter-de ﬁbrillator; LVOTO, left ventricular out ﬂow tract obstruction; P/LP, pathogenic or
likely pathogenic variant; SCD, sudden cardiac death; and VUS, variant of unknown signi ﬁcance.Ommen et al J A C CV O L .8 3 ,N O .2 3 ,2 0 2 4
2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –24052350

6.9. Individuals Who Are Genotype-Positive, Phenotype-NegativeFIGURE 2 Genetic Testing Process in HCM
Colors correspond to Table 3 . HCM indicates hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; LB/B, likely benign/benign; LP/P, likely pathogenic or pathogenic; and VUS, variant of unknown
signiﬁcance.
Recommendations for Individuals Who Are G enotype-Positive, Phenotype-Negative
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In individuals who are genotype- positive, phenotype-negative for HCM, serial clinical assessment,
electrocardiography, and cardiac imaging are recommended at periodic intervals depending on age (every1-2 years in children and adolescents and every 3-5 years in adults) and change in clinical status
(Figures 1 and 2,Table 7 ).
1-5
2a B-NR2. In individuals who are genotype-positive, phenotyp e-negative for HCM, participation in competitive
sports of any intensity is reasonable.6,7
3: No bene ﬁt B-NR3. In individuals who are genotype-positive, phenot ype-negative for HCM, ICD is not recommended for
primary prevention.2-6,8JACC VOL. 83, NO. 23, 2024 Ommen et al
JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –2405 2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline2351

Synopsis
Genotype-positive, phenotype-negative individuals are
those who carry a pathogenic or likely pathogenic HCM-causing variant but are asymptomatic without evidenceof LVH on cardiac imaging. These individuals are also
described as having preclinical HCM. They need ongoing
cardiac surveillance for development of clinical HCM,although the time from genetic diagnosis to clinical HCMvaries considerably within and between families.
1,5,8
Studies have reported alterations in myocardial strain,
LV relaxation abnormalities, myocardial crypts, mitralvalve lea ﬂet abnormalities, abnormal trabeculae,
myocardial scarring, electro cardiographic abnormalities,
and abnormal serum NT-proBNP concentrations even in
the absence of LVH.
9-12However, the clinical signi ﬁcance
of these subclinical structural and functional abnormal-ities is unclear and, therefore, treatment decisions areusually not made based on these ﬁndings alone.
Recommendation Speci ﬁcS u p p o r t i v eT e x t
1. The ongoing screening of genotype-positive, pheno-
type-negative family members of all ages is important.
Previous small studies reported onset of clinical HCM inadolescence or young adulthood for most genotype-positive cases.
1,5However, large studies suggest that
clinical HCM can develop in younger family members,with 5% to 10% being phenotype-positive at ﬁrst
screening and another 3% to 5% before 18 years ofage.
2,4,8A third of patients who developed clinical HCM
required medical, surgical, or device therapy before 18
years of age.4Phenotype conversion can occur in young
adults and, therefore, continued screening into adult-hood is warranted,
1although frequency of screening
can be lowered because disease penetrance is lower inindividuals who are >18 years of age.
3Although there is
an absence of systematic evidence, most physicianscontinue clinical screening until midlife (approximately
50 years of age) because disease can manifest in adults,
albeit at a lower frequency.2. Sudden death in genotype-positive, phenotype-nega-
tive individuals is rare.
6No accurate risk prediction
models for SCD exist in genotype-positive, pheno-type-negative individuals currently. In a recentprospective registry, no arrhythmic events in
genotype-positive, phenot ype-negative individuals
(total of 126) were observed, including those exer-cising vigorously or participating in competitive ath-letics.
7Decisions about participation in competitive
sports are usually made jointly with the patient andfamily taking into consideration family history of SCD,type of sports activity, and patient and family risktolerance. Because of the low risk of sudden death,
phenotype-negative individuals are not restricted
from competitive sports and are not routinely moni-tored with ambulatory elect rocardiography and exer-
cise stress testing unless the family history indicates ahigh risk for SCD or as part of precompetitive athletic
screening. This is appropriate every 1 to 2 years toassess the safety of ongoing competitive athleticsparticipation.
3. ICDs are not offered for primary prevention in
genotype-positive, phenot ype-negative individuals
given the low risk of SCD. Similarly, preemptive medi-cal therapy is not offered in genotype-positive, pheno-type-negative individuals. In a small pilot randomizedtrial, preemptive treatment of sarcomere variant-positive, phenotype-negative individuals with diltia-zem was associated with a small improvement in LV
diastolic function and thickness:dimension ratio on
3-year follow-up.
13However, the trial was not powered
to detect effects on clinical outcomes.
7. SCD RISK ASSESSMENT AND PREVENTION
7.1. SCD Risk Assessment
7.1.1. SCD Risk Assessment in Adults With HCM
Recommendations for SCD Risk Assessment in Adults With HCM
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In adult patients with HCM, a comprehensive, sy stematic noninvasive SCD ri sk assessment at initial
evaluation and every 1 to 2 years thereafter is recommended and should include evaluation of these risk
factors ( Figures 1 and 3,Table 8 )1-25:
a. Personal history of cardiac arrest or sustained ventricular arrhythmias;
b. Personal history of syncope suspected by clinical history to be arrhythmic;
c. Family history in close relative of premature HCM-related sudden death, cardiac arrest, or sustained
ventricular arrhythmias;
d. Maximal LV wall thickness, EF, LV apical aneurysm;
e. NSVT episodes on continuous ambulatory electrocardiographic monitoring.Ommen et al J A C CV O L .8 3 ,N O .2 3 ,2 0 2 4
2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –24052352

Synopsis
HCM has been regarded as one of the most common
causes of SCD in young people in North America.1,2,21,22,26-32
Among patients with HCM, younger patients are at higher
r i s kf o rS C Dt h a no l d e rp a t i e n t s .6,26-30 ,33-36There appears to
be no sex- or race-based differences in SCD risk.28,29Over
several decades, a multitude of studies have focused onidenti ﬁcation of major clinical risk markers that stratify
patients according to level of risk to identify high-risk pa-
tients who may be candidates for SCD prevention with ICDs
(Table 8 ).
1-22,26-33 ,37-61This risk strati ﬁcation strategy and
the penetration of ICDs into clinical practice has substan-tially reduced disease-related mortality rates.
31,32Predic-
tive risk scores are also available that can deriveindividualized estimated 5-year SCD risk to aid in riskstrati ﬁcation and ICD decision-making in adults and
children.
2,22,35,62,63Given that the risk of SCD extends over
many decades of life, periodic reassessment of SCD risk is
an integral component of the longitudinal evaluation ofmost patients with HCM.
1,2,6,22,31,32
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Numerous observational studies of patients with HCM
have identi ﬁed variables associated with increased risk
for potentially life-threatening ventricular tachyar-
rhythmias.1-22For this reason, SCD risk assessment at
the initial visit and repeated every 1 to 2 years1,2,31is a
critical part of the evaluation of patients with HCM andincludes: (1) previous history of cardiac arrest or sus-tained ( >30 seconds or associated with hemodynamic
compromise) ventricular arrhythmias
1,3; (2) family
history of SCD, or sustained ventricular arrhythmiasjudged de ﬁnitively or likely attributable to HCM in $1
ﬁrst-degree or other close family members #50 years of
age
1,2,5,6; (3) continuous (24- to 48-hour) ambulatory
electrocardiographic mo nitoring to detect NSVT
or sustained VT1,2,6,13,14,22;( 4 )h i s t o r yo fs y n c o p econsidered likely to be caused by arrhythmia (eg, epi-
sodes occurring in the previous 6 months because they
carry the most prognostic i mportance, whereas those
occurring >5 years in the past have little signi ﬁ-
cance)1,2,4,22; and (5) cardiac imaging that helps deter-
mine maximal LV wall thickness,7,9EF,10,21,24,25and
presence of apical aneurysm with transmural scar orLGE.
11,12Because data suggest a lower SCD event rate in
stable, older patients with HCM ( >60 years of age),32
the decision regarding ongoing risk assessment is
individualized in this subset of patients.
2. CMR imaging may more accurately measure maximal
LV wall thickness and detect LV apical aneurysm insome patients with HCM.
11,12,15-17In addition,
extensive myocardial replacement ﬁbrosis, as detec-
ted by CMR-derived LGE, is associated withincreased risk for potentia lly life-threatening ven-
tricular arrhythmias.
18-20For these reasons, if a pa-
tient with HCM does not have evidence of increasedSCD risk after assessment with family and personalhistory, echocardiography, and ambulatory moni-toring, or risk strati ﬁcation otherwise remains un-
certain, contrast-enhanced CMR imaging can providefurther characterization of maximum LV wall thick-ness measurement in any segment, EF, presence of
LV apical aneurysm, and presence and extent of
LGE.
1,10-12 ,15-21 ,24,25,31
3. To calculate estimated SCD 5-year risk estimates for
adults with HCM, echocardiographic left atrial diam-eter and maximal instantaneous LVOT gradient withcontinuous-wave Doppler technique are needed.
2,22
The SCD risk estimate does not take into account the
impact of newer markers of SCD risk, including systolic
dysfunction (EF <5 0 % ) ,a p i c a la n e u r y s m ,a n dL G E .T h e
impact of $1o ft h e s en e w e rr i s km a r k e r so nt h e5 - y e a r
risk estimate for an individual patient with HCM isundetermined.1 B-NR2. For adult patients with HCM who are not otherwise identi ﬁed as high risk for SCD, or in whom a decision
to proceed with ICD placement remains uncertain after clinical assessment that includes personal/family
history, echocardiography, and ambulatory elect rocardiographic monitoring, CMR imaging is bene ﬁcial to
assess for maximum LV wall thickness, EF, LV a pical aneurysm, and extent of myocardial ﬁbrosis with LGE
(Table 8 ).1,11,12,15-20
2a B-NR3. For patients who are ‡16 years of age with HCM, it is reasonable to o btain echocardiography-derived left
atrial diameter and maximal LVOT gradient to aid in ca lculating an estimated 5-year sudden death risk
that may be useful during shared decision-making for ICD placement ( Table 8 ).2,22JACC VOL. 83, NO. 23, 2024 Ommen et al
JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –2405 2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline2353

7.1.2. SCD Risk Assessment in Children and Adolescents With
HCM
Synopsis
Historically, risk strati ﬁcation for SCD in children has
been based on risk markers derived from adult HCM
studies. Several studies suggest that adult riskfactors have limited ability to predict SCD in pediatricpatients.
1-8,13,14More recent collaborative studies suggest
some, but not all, of the adult risk factors are important inpediatric patients with HCM.
1,4,5Two risk predictionmodels for children with HCM have been developed and
are being used in clinical practice.1,12The risk factors
proposed in these guidelines include a combination of
adult risk factors and currently available pediatric-speci ﬁc information. Ultimately, decisions regarding ICD
placement must be based on individual judgment for eachpatient, taking into account all age-appropriate riskmarkers, strength of the risk factor(s) identi ﬁed, theTABLE 8 Clinical Sudden Death Risk Factors for Adults and Children With HCM
Family history of sudden
death from HCMSudden death judged de ﬁnitively or likely attributable to HCM in $1ﬁrst-degree or close relatives who are #50 y of age. Close relatives would
generally be second-degree relatives; however, multiple SCDs in tertiary relatives should also be considered relevant.30,31
Massive LVH Wall thickness $30 mm in any segment within the chamber by echocardiography or CMR imaging; consideration for this morphologic marker is
also given to borderline values of $28 mm in individual patients at the discretion of the treating cardiologist. For pediatric patients with
HCM, an absolute or z-score threshold for wall thickness has not been established; however, a maximal wall thickness that corresponds to
a z-score $20 (and >10 in conjunction with other risk factors) appears reasonable.32,33
Unexplained syncope $1 unexplained episodes involving acute transient loss of consciousness, judged by history unlikely to be of neurocardiogenic (vasovagal)
etiology, not attributable to LVOTO, and especially when occurring within 6 mo of evaluation (events beyond 5 y in the past do not appear
to have relevance).34
HCM with LV systolic dysfunction Systolic dysfunction with EF <50% by echocardiography or CMR imaging.24,27
LV apical aneurysm Apical aneurysm de ﬁned as a discrete thin-walled dyskinetic or akinetic segment with transmural scar or LGE of the most distal portion of the
LV chamber, independent of size. (In children, apical aneurysm is uncommon, and the risk has not been studied.)15,16
Extensive LGE on CMR imaging Extensive LGE, representing replacement ﬁbrosis, either quanti ﬁed or estimated by visual inspection, comprising $15% of LV mass (extent of
LGE conferring risk has not been de ﬁned in children).9-11 ,20-22 ,25
NSVT on ambulatory monitor $3 beats at $120 bpm has generally been used in studies. It would seem most appropriate to place greater weight on NSVT as a risk marker
when runs are frequent (eg, $3), longer (eg, $10 beats), or faster (eg, $200 bpm) occurring usually over 24 to 48 h of monitoring. For
pediatric patients, a VT rate that exceeds the baseline sinus rate by >20% is considered signi ﬁcant.35-37
Genotype status Genotype-positive status (ie, harboring a putatively disease-causing pathogenic/likely pathogenic variant) is associated with higher SCD risk in
pediatric patients with HCM.12,14
bpm indicates beats/min; CMR, cardiovascular magnetic resonance; EF, ejection fraction; HCM, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; LGE, late gadolinium enhancement; LV, left ventricular; LVH, left
ventricular hypertrophy; LVOTO, left ventricular out ﬂow tract obstruction; NSVT, nonsustained ventricular tachycardia; SCD, sudden cardiac death; and VT, ventricular tachycardia.
Recommendations for SCD Risk Assessment in Children and Adolescents With HCM
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. For children and adolescents with HCM, a comprehe nsive, systematic noninvas ive SCD risk assessment at
initial evaluation and every 1 to 2 years thereafter is recommended and should include evaluation of these
risk factors ( Figures 1 and 3,Table 8 )1-8:
a. Personal history of cardiac arrest or sustained ventricular arrhythmias;
b. Personal history of syncope suspected by clinical history to be arrhythmic;
c. Family history in close relative of premature HCM-related sudden death, cardiac arrest, or sustained
ventricular arrhythmias;
d. Maximal LV wall thickness, EF, LV apical aneurysm;
e. NSVT episodes on continuous ambulatory electrocardiographic monitoring.
1 C-LD2. For children and adolescents with HCM who have a borderline risk for SCD, or in whom a decision to
proceed with ICD placement remains uncertain after cl inical assessment that includes personal and family
history, echocardiography, and ambulatory elect rocardiographic monitoring, CMR imaging is bene ﬁcial to
assess for extent of myocardial ﬁbrosis with LGE ( Table 8 ).9-11
2a B-NR3. For patients <16 years of age with HCM, it is reasonable to calculate an estimated 5-year sudden death
risk that includes echocardiographic parameters (interventricular sep tal thickness in diastole, LV pos-
terior wall thickness in end-diastole, left atrial di ameter, maximal LVOT gradi ent) and genotype, which
may be useful during shared decision-making for ICD placement ( Table 8 ).1,12Ommen et al J A C CV O L .8 3 ,N O .2 3 ,2 0 2 4
2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –24052354

overall clinical pro ﬁl e ,t h el e v e lo fr i s ka c c e p t a b l et ot h e
patient and family, and the potential complicationsrelated to device implants, including psychologicalimpact and inappropriate ICD shock.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. SCD risk assessment at the initial visit and repeated
every 1 to 2 years is a critical part of the evaluation of
patients with HCM
1-8,13,14and includes: (1) previous
history of cardiac arrest or sustained ( >30 seconds or
associated with hemodynamic compromise) ventricu-lar arrhythmias; (2) family history of sudden death,cardiac arrest, or sustained ventricular arrhythmias
judged de ﬁnitively or likely attributable to HCM in $1
ﬁrst-degree or other close family members #50 years of
age; (3) continuous (24- to 48-hour) ambulatory elec-
trocardiographic monitoring to detect NSVT or sus-
tained VT; (4) history of syncope considered likely tobe caused by arrhythmia; and (5) cardiac imaging thathelps determine maximal LV wall thickness, EF, andpresence of apical aneurysm . In pediatric patients, LV
wall thickness is commonly reported both as an abso-lute measurement and standardized z-score adjustedfor body surface area. The presence of HCM-associated
genetic variants is also included in one of the risk
calculators.
2. CMR imaging may more accurately measure maximal LV
wall thickness and detect LV apical aneurysm in somepatients with HCM.
15-19In addition, extensive myocar-
dial replacement ﬁbrosis, as detected by CMR-derivedLGE, is associated with increased risk for potentially
life-threatening ventricular arrhythmias.20-22For
these reasons, if a patient with HCM does not haveevidence of increased SCD risk after assessment withfamily and personal history, echocardiography, and
ambulatory monitoring, or risk strati ﬁcation otherwise
remains uncertain, contr ast-enhanced CMR imaging
can provide further characterization of maximum LVwall thickness measurement in any segment, EF,presence of LV apical aneurysm, and presence andextent of LGE.
15-28Although CMR imaging may be
helpful in pediatric patients with HCM,9-11this may
require sedation, the risk of which may outweigh the
bene ﬁts in an otherwise asymptomatic child. The use
of CMR imaging should be determined by the physicianand family after evaluating the child ’s individual risk.
3. To calculate 5-year SCD risk estimates for children with
HCM, age, echocardiographic LV wall diameter z-scores, left atrial diameter z -score, maximal instanta-
neous LVOT gradient with continuous-wave Dopplertechnique, in addition to history of unexplained syn-
cope, NSVT, with or without genotype status are
used.
1,12The SCD risk estimate does not account for
systolic dysfunction (EF <5 0 % ) ,a p i c a la n e u r y s m ,
exercise-induced ischemia, or LGE.9-11,29The contri-
bution of $1 of these newer risk markers on the 5-year
risk estimate for an individual patient with HCM isundetermined.
7.2. Patient Selection for ICD Placement
Recommendations for ICD Placeme nt in High-Risk Patients With HCM
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 C-EO1. In patients with HCM, application of individual clinical judgment is recommended when assessing the
prognostic strength of conventional risk marker(s) within the clinical pro ﬁle of the individual patient, as
well as a thorough and balanced dis cussion of the evidence, bene ﬁts, and estimated risks to engage the
fully informed patient ’s active participation in ICD decision-making.1-5
1 B-NR2. For patients with HCM and previous documented car diac arrest or sustained VT, ICD placement is rec-
ommended ( Figure 3 ,Table 8 ).2-6
2a B-NR3. For adult patients with HCM with ‡1 major risk factors for SCD, it is reasonable to offer an ICD. These
major risk factors include ( Figure 3 ,Table 8 )2,3,7-21:
a. Sudden death judged de ﬁnitively or likely attributable to HCM in ‡1ﬁrst-degree or close relatives who
are£50 years of age;
b. Massive LVH ‡30 mm in any LV segment;
c.‡1 recent episodes of syncope suspected by clinical history to be arrhythmic (ie, unlikely to be of
neurocardiogenic [vasovagal] etiology, or related to LVOTO);
d. LV apical aneurysm with transmural scar or LGE;
e. LV systolic dysfunction (EF <50%).
2a B-NR4 . F o rc h i l d r e nw i t hH C Mw h oh a v e ‡1 conventional risk factors, includin g unexplained syncope, massive LVH,
NSVT, or family history of early HCM-related SCD, ICD placement is reasonable after considering therelatively high complication rates of long-term ICD placement in younger patients ( Figure 3 ,Table 8 ).
22-30JACC VOL. 83, NO. 23, 2024 Ommen et al
JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –2405 2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline2355

Synopsis
In patients with HCM, risk strati ﬁcation and selection
of patients for prophylactic ICD therapy continues toevolve.
1-28 ,31-35 ,37The proven ef ﬁcacy of the ICD has
placed increasing weight on the importance of accurateselection of patients for device therapy.
4,5,28,31-33 ,38In
association with clinical judgment and shared decision-
making, patients with HCM are considered potentialcandidates for primary prevention ICDs by virtue of $1
major risk markers that have a high sensitivity in pre-dicting those patients with HCM at greatest riskSCD.
1,2,4,38More recently, risk estimate calculators have
been developed for adult and pediatric patients withHCM.
3,19,29,37This 5-year risk estimate may help patients
understand the magnitude of their SCD risk and can be
used during shared decision-making discussions.3,19
Because individual patients may consider the impact of
SCD risk estimates differently, it is the consensus of thewriting committee that management recommendationsshould not be assigned to prespeci ﬁed risk estimates as
t h es o l ea r b i t e ro ft h ed e c i s i o nt or e c o m m e n da nI C D .Contemporary SCD risk markers in HCM, including LV
apical aneurysm, LGE (with transmural scar), and systolic
dysfunction (EF <50%), are not included in the risk
calculator, and their impact on the calculated 5-year riskestimate is uncertain.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Primary prevention ICD de cision-making in HCM can
often be complex and chall enging, because of the low
SCD event rates observed in this disease. In addition,
the relatively young age of patients with HCM consid-ered for SCD prevention means risk periods can oftenextend over many years and decades of an individualpatient ’s life. For these reasons, decisions regardingprimary prevention ICD therapy should incorporate a
discussion with patients that includes risk for SCD andthe bene ﬁt that ICD therapy provides in protecting
against life-threatening ven tricular tachyarrhythmias
balanced with the understanding that long-term devicetherapy can be associated with complications.
1,4,5
2. Patients with HCM who have experienced a previous
documented cardiac arrest or hemodynamically sig-niﬁcant VT/ventricular ﬁbrillation (VF) remain at
signi ﬁcantly increased risk for future life-threatening
ventricular tachyarrhythmias and should therefore beconsidered for secondary prevention ICD therapy.
2-6
3. Identi ﬁcation of adult patients with HCM at high risk
for SCD should be guided by the presence of a number
of acknowledged noninvasive SCD risk factors
(Table 8 ). Because each of these major risk factors
individually is associated with increased risk, it wouldbe reasonable to consider primary prevention ICD forpatients with $1S C Dr i s kf a c t o r s( Figure 3 ,
Table 8 ).
2,4,5,7-18 ,20,21,31-33This risk strati ﬁcation strat-
egy provides high sensitivity for identifying at-riskpatients who may bene ﬁt from life-saving ICD ther-
apy and the opportunity to ful ly incorporate a shared-
decision making process that takes into considerationthe complete clinical pro ﬁle of the patient as well as
physician judgment and patient preference.
1,2,38Given
the very low SCD event rate observed in patients ofadvanced age ( >60 years) with HCM, the risk strati ﬁ-
cation strategy with major markers is most applicableto young adults and middle-aged patients with
HCM.
2,4,5,37,38
4. Risk strati ﬁcation in children with HCM requires eval-
uation of multiple age-appropriate risk factors.22-30 ,39
It would be reasonable to consider primary preven-
tion ICD for pediatric patients with $1S C Dr i s kf a c t o r s2a B-NR5. For patients with HCM with ‡1 major SCD risk factors, discussion of the estimated 5-year sudden death
risk and mortality rates can be useful during the s hared decision-making process for ICD placement
(Figure 3 ,Table 8 ).3,19,29,30
2b B-NR6. In select adult patients with HCM and without major SC D risk factors after clinical assessment, or in whom
the decision to proceed with ICD placement remains otherwise uncertain, ICD may be considered in
patients with extensive LGE by contrast-enhance d CMR imaging or NSVT present on ambulatory moni-
toring ( Figure 3 ,Table 8 ).2,3,16,19,31-33
2b B-NR7. In pediatric patients with HCM, it can be useful to consider additional factors such as extensive LGE on
contrast-enhanced CMR imaging and sy stolic dysfunction in risk strati ﬁcation for ICD shared decision-
making ( Figure 3 ,Table 8 ).34,35
3: Harm B-NR8. In patients with HCM without risk factors, ICD placement should not be performed.2
3: Harm B-NR9. In patients with HCM, ICD placement for the sole purp ose of participation in competitive athletics should
not be performed.36Ommen et al J A C CV O L .8 3 ,N O .2 3 ,2 0 2 4
2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –24052356

with the understanding that the magnitude may be
higher when multiple risk factors coexist in a patient(Figure 3 ,Table 8 ).
22-29 ,37,40,41Risk estimate scores that
incorporate risk factors relative to pediatric patients,along with left atrial diameter z-score and genotype
status, have been developed in children with HCM.
29,30
Although LV systolic dysf unction and apical aneu-
rysms are uncommon in children, it would seem pru-dent (based on adult evidence) to consider these in thecontext of the entire risk pro ﬁle of the individual pa-
tient. Finally, the complex ity and potential psycho-
logical impact of ICD decision-making in this age groupmust be underscored, given the long periods of time
with exposure to ICD therapy in young patients and the
relatively higher complication rates of long-term de-vice therapy in this subgroup of patients.
22-29
5. In patients with HCM with $1m a j o rS C Dr i s kf a c t o r s ,
estimating 5-year SCD risk may aid patients in under-standing the magnitude of th eir individual risk for SCD
to further assist in ICD decision-making.
19,29,30Because
individual patients may consider the impact of SCD risk
estimates differently, it is the consensus of the writing
committee that prespeci ﬁed risk threshol ds should not
b et h es o l ea r b i t e ro ft h ed e c i s i o nt oi n s e r ta nI C D .Contemporary SCD risk markers in HCM, including LVapical aneurysm, LGE, and systolic dysfunction(EF<5 0 % ) ,a r en o ti n c l u d e di nt h er i s kc a l c u l a t o r ,a n d
their impact on 5-year risk estimates is uncertain.
There are separate risk calculations for adult patients
19
and children and adolescents.29,30
6. Extensive LGE often occupying multiple LV segments
is associated with increased risk for future potentiallylife-threatening ventricular arrhythmias in adults,independent of location or pattern within the LVwall.
31-33Some studies have promoted a threshold for
extensive LGE of $15% of the LV mass as representing
as i g n i ﬁcant increase in SCD risk31,33; however, several
methods are used to quantify LGE that can yield
different results, and no consensus has been achievedabout which method is optimal. The strong cross-sectional relationship between LGE and NSVT in pa-
tients with HCM provides further support for LGE asrepresenting the structural nidus for ventriculartachyarrhythmias in HCM. In addition, bursts of NSVTidenti ﬁed on ambulatory monitoring performed over
24 to 48 hours are also associated with some increase
in SCD risk,
2,4,5,16,17,19with greatest weight as an in-
dependent risk factor given to adult patients with HCMwith particularly frequent, long, and fast runs ofNSVT.
17In the absence of other major risk markers, the
impact of short, isolated bursts of NSVT on SCD risk isless certain.
14,17,38The bene ﬁt of extended monitoring
period with longer-term ambulatory monitoring de-
vices for the purpose of risk strati ﬁcation in HCM re-
mains uncertain.
7. The association between SCD risk and LGE in children
with HCM is not well de ﬁned. Although nearly half of
older children and adolescents have LGE, the extent ofLGE that constitutes high risk in children has not beenestablished.
34,35However, given that LGE represents a
structural nidus for VT that can increase risk of SCD
outcomes in adult patients with HCM,31-33it would
seem appropriate to consider extensive LGE as poten-tially increasing SCD risk in children. LV systolicdysfunction is uncommon in children but likely alsoincreases risk for adverse events, including SCD.Sedation or general anesthesia may be required forCMR imaging in young patients.
8. Given the long-term complications associated with ICD
placement, device therapy should not be offered to
patients with HCM without evidence of increased riskbased on the proposed risk factor algorithm(Figure 3 ).
4,5
9. Sudden death risk strati ﬁcation and recommendations
for ICD placement should be made in accordance withthe algorithm put forth in this guideline, independentof decisions regarding sports participation. Inappro-
priate ICD utilization would expose patients unneces-
sarily to device-related complications and should beavoided.
36JACC VOL. 83, NO. 23, 2024 Ommen et al
JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –2405 2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline2357

7.3. ICD Device Selection ConsiderationsFIGURE 3 Patient Selection for ICD Use
Colors correspond to Table 3 . *ICD decisions in pediatric patients with HCM are based on $1 of these major risk factors: family history of HCM SCD, NSVT on
ambulatory monitor, massive LVH, and unexplained syncope. †5-year risk estimates can be considered to fully inform patients during shared decision-making
discussions. ‡It would seem most appropriate to place greater weight on frequent, longer, and faster runs of NSVT. CMR indicates cardiovascular magnetic
resonance; EF, ejection fraction; FH, family history; HCM, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; ICD, implantable cardioverter-de ﬁbrillator; LGE, late gadolinium
enhancement; LVH, left ventricular hypertrophy; NSVT, nonsustained ventricular tachycardia; SCD, sudden cardiac death; VF, ventricular ﬁbrillation; and VT,
ventricular tachycardia.
Recommendations for ICD Device Selection Considerations
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In patients with HCM who are receiving an ICD, either a single-chamber transvenous ICD or a subcu-
taneous ICD is recommended after a s hared decision-making discussi on that takes into consideration
patient preferences, age, lifesty le, and potential need for pacing fo r bradycardia or VT termination.1-6
1 B-NR2. In patients with HCM who are receiving a transve nous ICD, single-coil ICD leads are recommended in
preference to dual-coil leads, if de ﬁbrillation threshold is deemed adequate.7-9Ommen et al J A C CV O L .8 3 ,N O .2 3 ,2 0 2 4
2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –24052358

Synopsis
The decision of which type of ICD to implant is
nuanced. There are risks and bene ﬁts to consider. Con-
siderations include transv enous versus subcutaneous
ICD, single-chamber versus dual-chamber versus CRT
devices, and number of de ﬁbrillation coils with trans-
venous approach. Patients with HCM who receive ICDsare usually younger than th ose with ischemic and even
nonischemic cardiomyopathies who receive a device and,thus, life-long complications are likely to be higher inthose with HCM.
ICD implantation in children raises additional concerns
and challenges.
1,25,26Although selection for whom should
receive ICDs is discussed in Section 7.2 ,“Patient Selec-
tion for ICD Placement ”,the approach to implantation
will vary based on body size. Epicardial leads will often benecessary in smaller children, usually <30 kg, and for
children requiring an LV/CRT lead. Complications of ICDsmay be higher in children and adolescents because ofhigher baseline heart rates, which can lead to inappro-priate shocks, somatic growth that increases risk of lead
fracture, and the need for multiple device replacements
or extractions over a lifetime.
25In younger patients,
transvenous leads have shown higher rates of failurecompared with in older patients. Smaller individuals withsubcutaneous ICDs may also be at risk for highercomplication rates, including device erosion.
1,26,27
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1 . T h ed e c i s i o nt oi m p l a n ta nI C Di n c l u d e sa d d i t i o n a l
considerations, including transvenous versus subcu-taneous ICD.
1-6Bene ﬁts of transvenous devices
include the ability to pace for bradycardia, and po-tential RV apical pacing for reduction of symptoms,antitachycardia pacing for VT, smaller size, and
extended battery longevit y .T h ed i s a d v a n t a g ei st h e
lead, which may fail over time, necessitating addi-tional leads and removal of older leads, which isassociated with signi ﬁcant risk and the potential for
lead infections. Advantages of the subcutaneous ICD
include the lack of a transvenous lead, potentiallyfewer lead failures, and ease of removal. Disadvan-tages include the larger size of the device, theshorter battery longevity, potentially increased inap-propriate shocks, inability to pace, and shorter his-tory of use. Patients with HCM who undergosubcutaneous ICD implantation should be screened
for potential oversensing after exercise and even
potentially on a treadmill after implantation. Shareddecision-making conversations should incorporatepatient preferences, lifestyle, and expected potentialneed for pacing for bradycardia or VT termination.Providers should consider the age of the patient,because complications with transvenous systems arehigher in young patients,
25potential need for pac-
ing, and concerns about inappropriate shock and lead
longevity.
2. Single-coil ICD leads are less complicated to remove
but carry the risk of elevated de ﬁbrillation thresh-
olds.28However, most individuals, both with and
w i t h o u tH C M ,h a v ea na d e q u a t es a f e t ym a r g i nw i t hsingle-coil leads.
7-9,29Single-coil leads have almost
exclusively been implanted w i t hl e f t - s i d e di m p l a n t s ,
and data from populations without HCM suggest that
dual-coil leads are necessary for right-sided implants.Thus, the recommendation for single-coil leads shouldbe applied only to left-sided implants. Finally, strongconsideration should be given to de ﬁbrillation2a B-NR3. In patients with HCM who are receiving an ICD, dual-chamber ICDs are reasonable for patients with a need
for atrial or atrioventricular sequential pacing for br adycardia/conduction abno rmalities, or as an attempt
to relieve symptoms of obstructive HCM (most commonly in patients >65 years of age).10-13
2a C-LD4. In selected adult patients wit h nonobstructive HCM receiving an ICD who have NYHA class II to ambu-
latory class IV HF, left bundle branch block (LBBB), and LVEF <50%, cardiac resynchronization therapy
(CRT) for symptom reduction is reasonable.14-18
2b C-LD5. In patients with HCM in whom a decision has been made for ICD implantation and who have paroxysmal
atrial tachycardias or AF, dual-chamber ICDs may be reasonable, but this decision must be balanced
against higher complication r ates of dual-chamber devices.19-24JACC VOL. 83, NO. 23, 2024 Ommen et al
JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –2405 2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline2359

threshold testing in those patients with single-coil
leads, right-sided implants, epicardial systems, andmassive hypertrophy.
3. In patients with HCM with a need for atrial pacing, a
dual-chamber system would be needed. Four RCTs have
shown consistent ﬁndings on the bene ﬁto fR Vp a c i n gi n
patients with HCM with LVOT gradients $30 mm Hg.
Acutely, RV apical pacing reduces the LVOT gradient,but the long-term clinical bene ﬁts have not been
consistently bene ﬁcial.
10-14 ,30However, in subgroup
analysis, some evidence has been seen that RV pacingmay bene ﬁt some individuals who are $65 years of age.
This potential advantage must be weighed against the
higher complication risk with dual-chamber devices.
4. Although most of the evidence supporting the bene ﬁt
of CRT is derived from studies with minimal or nopatients with HCM, it would be reasonable to offer thistherapy to patients with HCM who meet current rec-ommendations of a CRT-de ﬁbrillator in accordance
with the AHA/ACC/HFSA HF guideline,
31including
patients with NYHA functional class II to ambulatory
class IV HF, LVEF #35%, and QRS duration with LBBB.
In addition to those patients, several small case seriesof CRT-de ﬁbrillator in patients with HCM and LVEF
>35% have been published.
14-18Some patients will
clinically respond to CRT with an improvement in theirNYHA functional class or evidence of reverse LVremodeling. The bene ﬁt appears to be greater in those
with LBBB and very prolonged QRS duration. Re-
sponders show a modest improvement in LVEF. Onestudy found a signi ﬁcantly longer time to the com-
bined endpoint of left ventricular assist device (LVAD)placement, heart transplantation, or death,
16while 2
other studies did not identify a survival bene ﬁt.14,18RV
pacing shares a similar physiology to LBBB so that this
recommendation may be extended to those with LVEFs
between 35% and 50% and expected to be paced >40%
of the time, similar to the recommendation in the 2018AHA/ACC/HRS bradycardia and cardiac conductiondelay guideline.
32
5. An atrial lead may provide better discrimination be-
tween ventricular and supraventricular arrhythmias,although data are modest regarding reduced inappro-
priate therapy in those with dual-chamber devices, and
data show that the complication rate is higher withdual-chamber devices.
19-24However, in pediatric pa-
tients with atrial tachyarrhythmias, the rates of whichcan approach typical VT rates, a dual-chamber devicemay aid in distinguishing supr aventricular tachycardia
from VT. This potential advantage must be weighedagainst the higher complication risk with the addi-
tional hardware.
8. MANAGEMENT OF HCM
8.1. Management of Symptomatic Patients With Obstructive
HCM
8.1.1. Pharmacological Management of Symptomatic Patients
With Obstructive HCM
Recommendations for Pharmacological Managemen t of Symptomatic Patients With Obstructive HCM
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In patients with obstructive HCM and symptoms *attributable to LVOTO, nonvasodilating beta blockers,
titrated to effectiveness or maximally tolerated doses, are recommended.1-3
1B-NR †2. In patients with obstructive HCM and symptoms *attributable to LVOTO, for whom beta blockers are
ineffective or not tolerated, substitution wi th nondihydropyridine calcium channel blockers
(eg, verapamil, †diltiazem ‡) is recommended.4-6C-LD ‡
1 B-R3. For patients with obstructive HCM who have persistent symptoms *attributable to LVOTO despite beta
blockers or nondihydropyridine calcium channel blockers, adding a myosin inhibitor (adult patients only),
or disopyramide (in combination with an atrioventr icular nodal blocking agent), or SRT performed at
experienced centers, §is recommended.7-14
1 C-LD4. For patients with obstructive HCM and acute hypotension who do not respond to ﬂuid administration,
intravenous phenylephrine (or other vasoconstrictors without inotropic activity), alone or in combination
with beta-blocking drugs, is recommended.15
2b C-EO5. For patients with obstructive HCM and persistent dy spnea with clinical evidence of volume overload and
high left-sided ﬁlling pressures despite other HCM GDMT, cau tious use of low-dose oral diuretics may be
considered.Ommen et al J A C CV O L .8 3 ,N O .2 3 ,2 0 2 4
2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –24052360

Synopsis
The principal role of pharmacological therapy tar-
geted at the dynamic LV obstruction is that of symp-tom relief because no convincing data are available tosuggest that pharmacological therapy alters the natural
history of HCM. Because the out ﬂow tract obstruction
is remarkably variable throughout daily life, the suc-cess of a given medication is determined by the pa-tient ’s symptom response and not the measured
gradient. In general, nonvasodilating beta blockers areconsidered ﬁrst-line therapy. The calcium channel
blockers —verapamil or diltiazem —a r er e a s o n a b l ea l t e r -
natives to beta-blocker therapy. For patients who do
not respond to trials of $1 of these drugs, advanced
therapies with disopyramide, mavacamten (a cardiacmyosin inhibitor), or septa l reduction are often the
next step. One of the other key steps in managingsymptomatic, obstructive HCM is to eliminate medica-tions that may promote out ﬂow tract obstruction, such
as pure vasodilators (eg, dihydropyridine class calciumchannel blockers, angiotensin-converting enzyme in-
hibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers) and high-dose
diuretics. Low-dose diuretics, when added to otherﬁrst-line medications, are sometimes useful for patients
with persistent dyspnea or congestive symptoms. Theprinciples of pharmacological management outlinedhere also apply to patients with obstruction at themidventricular level.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Beta blockers were the ﬁrst studied medication for
treatment of dynamic out ﬂow tract obstruction and are
generally considered the ﬁrst-line agent for most pa-
tients with obstructive HCM. Medications should betitrated to a dose where symptom bene ﬁt is observed,
but failure of beta-blockade should not be declareduntil demonstrated physi ologic evidence of beta-blockade (ie, suppression of resting heart rate) is
reported.
1-3
2. Diltiazem and verapamil b oth have been demonstrated
to provide relief of symptoms in patients withobstructive HCM. These agents can have vasodilating
properties, in addition to the negative inotropic and
negative chronotropic effects, which can be limiting.The use of calcium channel blockers in combinationwith beta blockers, as therapy directed at HCM, is un-supported by evidence
4-6; however, these may have a
role in management of concomitant hypertension.
3. Patients with HCM who do not respond to ﬁrst-line
therapy are candidates for escalation of therapy,
including cardiac myosin inhibitors (eg, mavacamten)
(in adult patients only), disopyramide, and SRT whenperformed by experienced operators in comprehensiveHCM centers ( Tables 4 and 5 ). The choice among these
options should be approached through a comprehen-sive discussion with the patient that includes the suc-cess rates, bene ﬁt s ,a n dr i s k so fe a c ho ft h eo p t i o n s .
Mavacamten is a cardiac myosin inhibitor and has been
shown to improve LVOT gradients, symptoms, and
functional capacity in 30% to 60% of patients withobstructive HCM.
13,14In the United States, a risk eval-
uation and mitigation strategy is required due to theobserved decrease in LVEF <50% in 5.7% of patients
attributable solely to the drug, but as high as 7% to 10%of patients when other extenuating clinical conditionsare considered that nevertheless may also result in
temporary discontinuation.
14,17Disopyramide has also
been shown to provide symptomatic bene ﬁti np a t i e n t s
w i t ho b s t r u c t i v eH C Mw h oh a v ef a i l e d ﬁrst-line ther-
apy.7-9B e c a u s ed i s o p y r a m i d ec a ne n h a n c ec o n d u c t i o n
through the atrioventricular node, which could lead torapid conduction with the onset of AF, this medicationshould be used in combination with another medica-tion that has atrioventricular nodal blocking properties2b C-EO6. For patients with obstructive HCM, discontinuation of vasodilators (eg, angiot ensin-converting enzyme
inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers, dihydro pyridine calcium channel bl ockers) or digoxin may be
reasonable because these agents can wo rsen symptoms caused by dynamic out ﬂow tract obstruction.
3: Harm C-LD7. For patients with obstructive HCM and severe dyspnea at rest, hypotension, very high resting gradients
(eg, >1 0 0m mH g ) ,a sw e l la sa l lc h i l d r e n <6 weeks of age, verapamil is potentially harmful.4,16
*Symptoms include effort-related dyspnea or chest pain and occasionally other exertional symptoms (eg, syncope, near syncope) that are attributed to LVOTO and interfere with everyday activity
or quality of life.
†Symbol corresponds to the Level of Evidence for verapamil.
‡Symbol corresponds to the Level of Evidence for diltiazem.
§Comprehensive or primary HCM centers with demonstrated excellence in clinical outcomes for these procedures ( Tables 4 and 5 ).JACC VOL. 83, NO. 23, 2024 Ommen et al
JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –2405 2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline2361

(eg, beta blocker, verapamil, or diltiazem). SRT, when
performed by experienced operators in comprehensiveHCM centers ( Tables 4 and 5 ), is very effective for
relieving LVOTO and can be used instead of mava-camten or disopyramide.
10-12
4. Acute hypotension in patients with obstructive HCM is
a medical urgency. Maximizing preload and afterload,while avoiding increases in co ntractility or heart rate, is
the critical focus in treating acute hypotension. Intra-venous vasoconstrictors, such as phenylephrine, canalso reverse this dangerous situation. Beta-blockadecan also be useful in combination with the vasocon-strictor as it dampens contractility and improves pre-
load by prolonging the diastolic ﬁlling period.
15
5 .W h e ns i g n so rs y m p t o m so fc o n g e s t i o na r eo b s e r v e d ,
cautious use of low-dose diuretics may provide somesymptom relief. Aggressive diuresis can be problematic,as decreasing the preload can augment LVOTO.
6. Caution should be used when introducing therapies in
patients with HCM who will be treated for coexistingconditions. Some medications can cause or worsen
symptoms related to LVOTO. Examples include the use
of diuretics and vasodilators to treat hypertension orprotect renal function. Those medications can be usedin asymptomatic patients. However, if symptoms arepresent, or emerge after the initiation of the medica-
tion, it may be necessary to uptitrate medications beingu s e df o ro b s t r u c t i v eH C Mo rc o n s i d e ra l t e r n a t i v et h e r -apies for the comorbid condition. As a result, positiveinotropic agents, pure vasodilators, and high-dose di-
uretics can be considered relatively contraindicated in
patients with symptomatic obstructive HCM.
7. Although verapamil and diltiazem can be very effective
medications to relieve symptoms attributable toLVOTO, in some patients, they have been reported tohave a more prominent vasodilatory action. Thisafterload-reducing effect can be particularly dangerousin patients with very high resting gradients ( >80-100
mm Hg) and signs of congestive HF. Several reports
have been published of life-threatening bradycardiaand hypotension in newborns of <6 weeks of age who
have received intravenous v erapamil for supraventric-
ular tachycardia.
16However, verapamil has been found
to be ef ﬁcacious and well tolerated when administered
to older infants and children with HCM in controlledconditions.
18
8.1.2. Invasive Treatment of Symptomatic Patients With
Obstructive HCM
Recommendations for Invasive Treatment of Symptomatic Patients With Obstructive HCM
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In patients with obstructive HCM who remain sym ptomatic despite GDMT, SRT in eligible patients, *
performed at experienced HCM centers, †is recommended for relieving LVOTO ( Tables 4 and 5).1-3
1 B-NR2. In symptomatic patients with obstructive HCM who ha ve associated cardiac disease requiring surgical
treatment (eg, associated anomalous papillary mu scle, markedly elongated anterior mitral lea ﬂet,
intrinsic mitral valve disease, multivessel CAD, valvular aortic stenosis), surgical myectomy, performed atexperienced HCM centers, †is recommended ( Tables 4 and 5).
4-7
1 C-LD3. In adult patients with obstruc tive HCM who remain severely symp tomatic, despite GDMT and in whom
surgery is contraindicated or the risk is considere d unacceptable because of serious comorbidities or
advanced age, alcohol septal ablation in eligible patients, *performed at experienced HCM centers, †
is recommended ( Tables 4 and 5).8-10
2b B-NR4. In patients with obstructive HCM, earlier (NYHA cla ss II) surgical myectomy pe rformed at comprehensive
HCM centers ( Tables 4 and 5) may be reasonable in the presence of additional clinical factors,
including3,11-22:
a. Severe and progressive pulmonary hypertension thought to be attributable to LVOTO or associated MR;
b. Left atrial enlargement with ‡1 episodes of symptomatic AF;
c. Poor functional capacity attributable to LVOTO as documented on treadmill exercise testing;
d. Children and young adults with very high resting LVOT gradients ( >100 mm Hg).
2b C-LD5. For symptomatic patients with obstru ctive HCM, SRT in eligible patients, *performed at experienced HCM
centers †(Tables 4 and 5), may be considered as an alternative to escalation of medical therapy after
shared decision-making including risks and bene ﬁts of all treatment options.1,10,23-25Ommen et al J A C CV O L .8 3 ,N O .2 3 ,2 0 2 4
2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –24052362

Synopsis
SRT is generally reserved for drug-refractory symptoms
and should be performed in experienced HCM centers.28
Transaortic extended septal myectomy (ESM) is anappropriate treatment for the broadest range of patients
and allows gradient relief at any level within the
ventricle,
29-31with a mortality rate of <1% and clinical
success >90% to 95%.1,24,27,32-39Successful ESM elimi-
nates or reduces SAM-mediated MR and its conse-quences.
27,32,40,41Long-term survival after ESM is similar
to an age-matched general population. Recurrent out ﬂow
tract obstruction is rare after ESM.42-44ESM is especially
advantageous when associated cardiac disease or associ-
ated papillary muscle abnormalities are present.4,37,45In
HCM centers with experienced interventional teams,alcohol septal ablation is also associated with a low pro-cedural mortality rate ( <1%) but requires appropriate
coronary anatomy. Alcohol septal ablation avoids ster-notomy, has a shorter hospital stay, and is advantageouswhen frailty or comorbidities increase the risk of ESM.Alcohol septal ablation is less effective with
gradients $100 mm Hg and septal thickness $30 mm
9,46
and is associated with greater risk of permanent pace-
maker and greater need for repeat intervention for re-sidual obstruction.
8-10Although 5-year survival is similar
between alcohol septal ablation and myectomy,8,9,47,48at
10 years of follow-up, survival is lower with alcohol septala b l a t i o nc o m p a r e dw i t hE S M .
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Generally, SRT performed by experienced operators in
comprehensive centers ( Tables 4 and 5 )i sc o n t e m -
plated when patients continue to have severe symp-toms despite optimal medical therapy or intolerantadverse effects from medical therapy.
1SRT with either
surgical myectomy or alcohol septal ablation is rarelyindicated for the asymptomatic patient. Survival of
patients with LVOTO is reduced compared with those
without obstruction, and relief of obstruction maymitigate this incremental risk.
2,3Currently, however,
insuf ﬁcient evidence is available to recommend SRT to
improve patient survival as the only indication for theprocedures. Highly symptomatic patients should be
able to participate in a full discussion of all treatmentoptions, including the success rates, bene ﬁts, and
risks. If either of the proce d u r e si su n a v a i l a b l ef o rt h e
patient at their primary cardiology practice, referral to
more comprehensive HCM centers is encouraged
because the literature demonstrates a volume-outcomerelationship. The classic approach of transaortic septalmyectomy is potentially limited in infants and youngchildren in whom the aortic annulus is small. In suchinstances, the modi ﬁed Konno procedure has been re-
ported to provide equally satisfactory long-term resultsfor basal obstruction and a transapical approach (or
combined transaortic and transapical) for mid-
ventricular obstruction.
49
2. In patients with symptomatic obstructive HCM who
have associated cardiac disease requiring surgicaltreatment (eg, associated anomalous papillary muscle,markedly elongated a nterior mitral lea ﬂet, intrinsic
mitral valve disease, CAD, valvular aortic stenosis),surgical myectomy performed by experienced opera-
tors provides the opportunity to correct all structural
and anatomic issues with a single procedure. Similarly,for patients with paroxysmal AF, intraoperative pul-monary vein isolation or maze procedure can also beadded to septal myectomy.
50,51Transaortic septal
myectomy adds little to the risk of other cardiac pro-cedures, and relief of LVOTO will minimize the risk ofhemodynamic instability early postoperatively.
4-7
3. In adult patients with symptomatic obstructive HCM in
whom surgery is contraindicated or the risk is consid-ered unacceptably high because of serious comorbid-ities or advanced age, alcohol septal ablation whenfeasible and performed in experienced HCM centers(Tables 4 and 5 ) becomes the preferred invasive strat-
egy for relief of LVOTO.
8-10
4. Although most patients who undergo SRT are those
with advanced symptoms (NYHA functional class III to
class IV), select patients who report fewer symptomsbut who have other evidence of signi ﬁcant hemody-
namic impairment may be eligible for surgical myec-tomy at comprehensive HCM centers ( Tables 4 and 5 )t o3: Harm C-LD6. For patients with HCM who are asymptomatic and have normal exercise capacity, SRT is not
recommended.13,21
3: Harm B-NR7. For symptomatic patients with obstructive HCM in whom SRT is an option, mitral valve replacement
should not be performed for the sole purpose of relief of LVOTO.26,27
*General eligibility criteria for septal reduction therapy: (a) clinical: severe dyspnea or chest pain (usually NYHA functional class III or class I V), or occasionally other exertional symptoms (eg,
syncope, near syncope), when attributable to LVOTO, that interferes with everyday activity or quality of life despite optimal medical therapy; (b) h emodynamic: dynamic LVOT gradient at rest or
with physiologic provocation with approximate peak gradient of $50 mm Hg, associated with septal hypertrophy and SAM of mitral valve; and (c) anatomic: targeted anterior septal thickness
sufﬁcient to perform the procedure safely and effectively in the judgment of the individual operator.
†Comprehensive or primary HCM centers with demonstrated excellence in clinical outcomes for these procedures ( Tables 4 and 5 ).JACC VOL. 83, NO. 23, 2024 Ommen et al
JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –2405 2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline2363

relieve the LVOTO and its sequelae. Data suggest that
surgical myectomy can improve progressive pulmo-nary hypertension,
11,12,52improve outcomes of those
with marked exercise impairment,13reverse left atrial
enlargement,14,15,53ameliorate occult gastrointestinal
bleeding,41,42and decrease rates of subsequent atrial54
and ventricular arrhythmias.3,18,19Similar to the rec-
ommendations for patients with asymptomatic mitralvalve disease, earlier surgery in patients with HCMshould be limited to those comprehensive HCM centerswith documented evidence of the highest success ratesand lowest complication rates (ie, durable success is>90% with an expected mortality rate <1%) ( Table 5 ).
20
Although successful alcohol septal ablation has been
shown to improve new onset AF burden and NYHAfunctional class in those presenting with NYHA func-tional class II symptoms and thereby could be reason-ably expected to offer similar bene ﬁts at
comprehensive HCM centers, this must be balancedagainst the higher pacemaker and reintervention ratesin this lower risk cohort.
8,9,55-58
5. Some patients with obstructive HCM and severe
symptoms might choose SRT as an alternative toescalation of medical man agement after being fully
informed through shared decision-making about risksand bene ﬁts. Previously, SRT was reserved, appropri-
ately, for the most symptomatic patients because aprocedural mortality rate was 5% to 10%. This highmortality rate has been observed in the recent era in
HCM centers with less experience with the operation.
23
In comprehensive HCM centers, procedural complica-
tion rates are very low, offering septal reduction topatients with signi ﬁcant limiting HF symptomswithout waiting for progression to marked disability
(ie, traditional NYHA functional class III and class IV)and can be seen as similar t o offering early interven-
tion in valvular heart disease in centers with demon-strated excellent outcomes.
1,10,24,25However,
symptoms and impaired quality of life may be
perceived very differently by individual patients with
HCM, underscoring the importance of shared decision-making in establishing the optimal timing forintervention.
6. No de ﬁnitive data have been published to suggest
bene ﬁtf o rS R Ti na d u l tp a t i e n t sw i t hH C Mw h oa r e
asymptomatic with normal exercise tolerance or those
whose symptoms are easily minimized on optimal
medical therapy.
13,21
7. Mitral valve replacement is more common in general-
ized HCM centers than in sp ecialized HCM centers, and
while valve replacement eliminates SAM and associ-ated MR as well as the out ﬂow tract gradient, the
addition of mitral valve replacement with or withoutmyectomy increases the hospital mortality rate ( >10-
fold) and length of hospitalization compared with pa-
tients undergoing isolated septal myectomy.
26Further,
when intervention on the valve at the time of myec-tomy is needed because of intrinsic mitral disease,every effort should be made to repair the valve becauseearly and long-term mortality is worse in patients withprosthetic replacement compared with patients whohave septal myectomy and mitral valve repair.
27
8.2. Management of Patients With Nonobstructive HCM With
Preserved EF
Recommendations for Management of Patients With Nonobstructive HCM With Preserved EF
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 C-LD1. In patients with nonobstructive HCM with preserve d EF and symptoms of exertional angina or dyspnea,
beta blockers or nondihydropyridine calc ium channel blockers are recommended.1-5
2a C-EO2. In patients with nonobstructive HCM with preserved EF, it is reasonable to add oral diuretics when ex-
ertional dyspnea persists despite the use of beta block ers or nondihydropyridine calcium channel blockers.
2b C-LD3. In patients with nonobstructive HCM with preserved EF , the usefulness of angiot ensin-converting enzyme
inhibitors and angiotens in receptor blockers in the treatment of symptoms (angina and dyspnea) is not
well established.6
2b C-LD4. In highly selected patients with apical HCM with s evere dyspnea or angina (NYHA functional class III or
class IV) despite maximal medical th erapy, and with preserved EF and sma ll LV cavity size (LV end-diastolic
volume <50 mL/m2and LV stroke volume <30 mL/m2), apical myectomy by experienced surgeons at
comprehensive centers may be c onsidered to reduce symptoms.7Ommen et al J A C CV O L .8 3 ,N O .2 3 ,2 0 2 4
2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –24052364

Synopsis
Symptomatic, nonobstructive HCM is a diagnostic and
therapeutic challenge. This is related to differences in
disease onset, severity, and risk for adverse outcomes.9
The overall risk for HCM-related death appears similarbetween patients with and wit hout obstructive physi-
ology.
10Dyspnea and chest discomfort are common
symptoms in patients with nonobstructive HCM. Thesecan be a result of increased LV ﬁlling pressures related to
diastolic dysfunction (includi ng restrictive physiology) or
decompensated HF, increased myocardial oxygen de-
mand, impaired microvascular function, or coincidentalCAD. The presence of restrictive physiology in associationwith HCM has been described in children and appears toconfer higher risk of adverse outcomes.
11In patients with
angina or CAD risk factors, obstructive CAD should beexcluded.
12Comorbid conditions including hypertension,
diabetes, obesity, obstructive sleep apnea, and physical
inactivity are often major contributors to reduced ﬁtness
and symptoms in patients with nonobstructive HCM.Control of these comorbid conditions in combination withpharmacological therapies for HCM can provide optimalreduction of symptom burden. No trials have prospec-tively evaluated the long-term outcomes with medica-t i o n si np a t i e n t sw i t hn o n o b s t r u c t i v eH C M .
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. In patients with nonobstructive HCM without
obstructive CAD, pharmacological management ofchest discomfort is similar to that of dyspnea. Betablockers and nondihydropyridine calcium channelblockers are ﬁrst-line agents. Both therapies aim to
slow the heart rate, improve diastolic function, reduceLVﬁlling pressures, and re duce myocardial oxygen
demand. These agents have only been evaluated in a
few small trials, with most of the trials having a mix ofpatients with obstructive and nonobstructive HCM. Inpatients without LVOTO, verapamil or diltiazem areeffective at reducing chest pain and improving exercisecapacity and may improve stress myocardial perfusiondefects.
1-5Alternatively, beta blockers are used in
symptomatic patients based on clinical experience and
extrapolation from obstructive HCM, rather than trial
data.13,14The medication doses should be titrated toeffectiveness with monitoring for bradycardia or
atrioventricular conduction block, especially if the
calcium channel blockers and beta blockers are used in
combination. Beta blockers should be the primarymedical therapy in neonates and children. Limiteddata suggest verapamil (in patients >6m o n t h so fa g e )
can be used safely as an alternative to beta blockers.
15
2. Loop or thiazide diuretics may be used to improve
dyspnea and volume overload in nonobstructive HCMwhen volume overload is present. Aldosterone antag-
onists are also used in some patients. Cautious use of
any of these diuretics is need ed, usually as intermit-
tent dosing as needed or chronic low-dose therapy, toprevent symptomatic hypotension and hypovolemia.
3. Although several pilot trials suggested that angiotensin
receptor blockers and angiotensin-converting enzymeinhibitors may have bene ﬁts on myocardial structure
and function, a 12-month placebo-controlled trial of
124 patients with nonobstructive and obstructive HCM
(112 with LVOT gradient <30 mm Hg) did not show any
bene ﬁt of losartan versus placebo on LV mass, ﬁbrosis,
or functional class.
6However, treatment with losartan
was without clinically adverse consequences and couldbe used for other indications, if needed.
4. Patients with extensive apical hypertrophy extending
to the midventricle may have severely reduced LV end-
diastolic volume and severe diastolic dysfunction. This
often leads to refractory angina, dyspnea, and ven-tricular arrhythmias with very limited medical options.Transapical myectomy to augment LV cavity size witha na i mt oi n c r e a s es t r o k ev o l u m ea n dd e c r e a s eL Ve n d -diastolic pressure has been found to be safe andreduced symptoms.
7Although experience of only a
single center has been published,7this surgical
approach may be an option for this rare subgroup of
severely symptomatic patients with nonobstructiveHCM who have a small LV cavity size refractory toroutine therapy. Practical ly, small cavity size has
evolved to be de ﬁned as LV end-diastolic volume <50
mL/m
2and LV stroke volume <30 mL/m2.T h i ss u r g i c a l
approach requires extensive surgical experience withHCM and should be limited to centers of excellence
with the highest volumes, surgical experience, and
expertise.2b C-EO5. In asymptomatic patients wi th nonobstructive HCM, the bene ﬁt of beta blockers or calcium channel
blockers is not well established.
2b B-R6. For younger (eg, £45 years of age) patients with nonobstru ctive HCM due to a pathogenic or likely
pathogenic cardiac sarcomere gene tic variant, and a mild phenotype, *valsartan may be bene ﬁcial to slow
adverse cardiac remodeling.8
*Mild phenotype indicates NYHA functional class I or II, maximal LV wall thickness 13 to 25 mm, no secondary prevention ICDs, no history of appropriate ICD shocks, and no AF.JACC VOL. 83, NO. 23, 2024 Ommen et al
JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –2405 2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline2365

5. The aim of beta blockers and nondihydropyridine cal-
cium channel blockers is to reduce symptoms bylowering LV diastolic pressures and improve LV ﬁlling
with a slower heart rate. In the absence of symptoms,no data are available that indicate a bene ﬁt, although
the use of these agents may paradoxically lead to
chronotropic incompetence. Iatrogenic chronotropicincompetence should be considered in patients withsymptoms and no identi ﬁed obstructive physiology at
rest or with provocation. Assessment may include anambulatory ECG to look for a heart rate plateau or astress test to look for an i nappropriate heart rate
response. No prospective data are available that
demonstrating bene ﬁt of these agents on long-term
outcomes in patients with nonobstructive HCM.
6. A randomized, double-blind placebo controlled trial of
valsartan, titrated to maximum U.S. Food and Drug
Recommendations for Management of Patients With HCM and Advanced HF
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 C-LD1. In patients with HCM who develop systolic dysfunction with an LVEF <50%, GDMT for HF with reduced EF
is recommended.1-3
1 C-LD2. In patients with HCM and systolic dysfunction, di agnostic testing to assess for concomitant causes of
systolic dysfunction (eg, CAD) is recommended.4,5
1 B-NR3. In patients with nonobstructive HCM and advanced HF ( NYHA functional class III to class IV despite GDMT),
CPET should be performed to quantify the degree of functional limitation and aid in selection of patients
for heart transplantation or mechanical circulatory support.6,7
1 B-NR4. In patients with nonobstructive HCM and advanced HF ( NYHA functional class III to class IV despite GDMT)
or with life-threatening ventricular arrhythmias refractory to maximal GDMT, assessment for heart
transplantation in accordance with cu rrent listing criteri a is recommended.8-13
1 B-R5. In patients with HCM who develop persistent systolic dysfunction (LVEF <50%), cardiac myosin inhibitors
should be discontinued.14
2a C-EO6. For patients with HCM who develop systolic dysfunction (LVEF <50%), it is reasonable to discontinue
previously indicated negati ve inotropic agents (speci ﬁcally, verapamil, diltiazem, or disopyramide).
2a B-NR7. In patients with nonobstructive HCM and advanced HF ( NYHA functional class III to class IV despite GDMT)
who are candidates for heart transplantation, continuous- ﬂow LVAD therapy is reasonable as a bridge to
heart transplantation.15-19
2a C-LD8. In patients with HCM and persistent LVEF <50%, ICD placement can be bene ﬁcial.3,20
2a C-LD9. In patients with HCM and LVEF <50%, NYHA functional class II to class IV symptoms despite GDMT, and
LBBB, CRT can be bene ﬁcial to improve symptoms.21-25Administration –approved doses, in 178 patients who
h a dn o n o b s t r u c t i v eH C Ma n dw e r e8t o4 5y e a r so fa g ewith pathogenic or likely pathogenic sarcomeric vari-a n t s ,N Y H Af u n c t i o n a lc l a s sIt oI Is y m p t o m s ,n o r m a lEF, no secondary prevention ICDs, no history of
appropriate ICD shocks, and no prior SRT demon-
strated an attenuation in a composite endpoint of LVwall thickness, LV mass, LV volume, left atrial size,diastolic parameters, and biomarkers.
8Trials of other
angiotensin receptor blockers tended to be smaller,included older patients with more advanced pheno-typic expression, and/or those without sarcomericvariants.
8.3. Management of Patients With HCM and Advanced HFOmmen et al J A C CV O L .8 3 ,N O .2 3 ,2 0 2 4
2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –24052366

Synopsis
An approach to the management of HF symptoms is
shown in Figures 4 and 5 . EF often overestimates
myocardial systolic function in patients with HCM. AnEF<50% is associated with worse outcomes and therefore
is considered to represent signi ﬁcantly reduced systolic
function.
2,20,26-29A l t h o u g hu n c o m m o ni np a t i e n t sw i t h
HCM, an EF <35% confers a particularly high risk of death,
t h en e e df o ra d v a n c e dH Ft h e r a p i e s ,a n dm a l i g n a n tv e n -tricular arrhythmias.
28As such, in patients with HCM,
GDMT for HF with reduced EF is initiated for EF <50%
and otherwise is generally based on the AHA/ACC/HFSAHF guideline.
1An ICD for the primary prevention of SCD,
or CRT in patients with EF <50% and NYHA functional
c l a s sI I It oc l a s sI Vs y m p t o m sw h om e e to t h e rc r i t e r i af o rCRT, is also reasonable. Regardless of LVEF, if patientsexperience recurrent ventri cular arrhythmias or severe
(NYHA functional class III to class IV) symptoms despiteoptimization of medical therapy and SRT is not an option,h e a r tt r a n s p l a n te v a l u ation is warranted,
10,30and CPET
has a role in risk strati ﬁcation.6,7For patients with NYHA
functional class III to class IV symptoms, an LVAD is
sometimes used.17,18
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. No RCTs have been performed in patients with HCM
and HF. When tested in RCTs in patients with HCMa n dn o r m a lE F ,n e i t h e rl o s a r t a n
31nor spironolactone32
had any effect on markers of ﬁbrosis, LV dimensions,
EF, or symptoms. Observational studies of patients
with HCM and EF <50% indicate worse survival than
that of patients with HCM and preserved EF,2,20,26-29
might be worse than that of patients with dilated
cardiomyopathy,33and does not vary based on the
presence or absence of LV dilation.34Further,
myocardial transcriptomic pro ﬁling has identi ﬁed
substantial overlap in gene network activation be-
tween dilated cardiomyopathy and HCM.35,36Thus,
although HCM has typically been excluded from RCTsin HF, no compelling reason exists to indicate thatHCM with reduced EF differs suf ﬁciently to disqualify
many highly effective, evidence-based GDMTs for HFwith reduced EF as tolerated in the presence ofrestrictive physiology.
1
2. Identi ﬁcation of reduced EF in the setting of HCM is
uncommon (approximately 5%) and should prompt an
appropriate search for other potential contributingcauses of LV dysfunction.
2,4,5,28,34Those causes should
include, but are not limited to, HCM phenocopies, CAD,valvular heart disease, and metabolic disorders asoutlined in the AHA/ACC/HFSA HF guideline.
1
3. CPET provides a noninvasive method for assessing the
cardiovascular, pulmonary, and skeletal muscle com-
ponents of exercise performance. In patients withHCM, exercise parameters such as peak oxygen con-
sumption, minute ventilation to CO 2production, and
ventilatory anaerobic threshold predict death from HFand need for heart transplantation.
6,7
4. Patients with HCM, particularly those with LVOTO
whose symptoms respond to appropriate therapies,
do not warrant evaluation fo r transplantation. How-
ever, advanced HF arises in a subset (3%-8%) ofpatients with HCM.
2,6,20,28,30Referral for trans-
plantation should be in accordance with currentguidelines.
11Posttransplant survival in patients with
HCM is comparable, and possibly superior, to that ofpatients with other forms of heart disease.
8,9,12,37,38
Importantly, 20% to 50% of patients with HCM who
have advanced HF have preserved EF with restrictivephysiology; hence, transplant referral for HCM doesnot require a reduced EF.
12,30Patients with HCM and
advanced HF are far less likely to receive mechanicalcirculatory support.
39This is attributable to smaller
LV size and differing hemodynamic pro ﬁles, which
may increase the risk of adverse outcomes due to
prolonged wait time and limited options once listed
for transplant. The revised 2018 United Network for
Organ Sharing Heart Transplant Allocation Policyaddresses this disparity with separate listing criteriaand priority speci ﬁc to patients with HCM. These
new listing criteria have signi ﬁcantly increased
transplantation rates and reduced waitlist times inpatients with HCM.
13Children with HCM also war-
rant consideration for transplantation if they are not
responsive to or appropriate candidates for othertherapies.
40
5. Mavacamten is a ﬁrst-in-class myosin inhibitor that
decreases myocardial contractility. Given this mecha-nism of action, mavacamten reduces LVEF, and anLVEF <50% was a prespeci ﬁed criterion for temporary
study drug discontinuation. Thus, in those who
develop LVEF <50%, interruption with resumption at
lower dose (if LVEF improves) or discontinuation (ifLVEF does not improve to >50%) of cardiac myosin
inhibitors is required regard less of associated signs and
symptoms.
41
6. Despite the absence of RCTs or observational data,
negative inotropic agents (speci ﬁcally, verapamil, dil-
tiazem, and disopyramide) that are otherwise indi-
cated for management of HCM may need to be
discontinued in patients with systolic dysfunction andworsening HF symptoms. However, these agents maybe continued if needed for rate or rhythm control of AFon a case-by-case basis.
7. Patients with HCM have traditionally been ineligible
for LVAD support because of small LV cavities andrelatively preserved EF. However, several case series
have demonstrated that support with continuous ﬂowJACC VOL. 83, NO. 23, 2024 Ommen et al
JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –2405 2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline2367

FIGURE 4 Management of Symptoms in Patients With HCM
Colors correspond to Table 3 . GL indicates guideline; and HCM, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.Ommen et al J A C CV O L .8 3 ,N O .2 3 ,2 0 2 4
2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –24052368

FIGURE 5 Heart Failure Algorithm
Cardiac myosin inhibitor should be discontinued if LVEF <50% and can be restarted at a lower dose if the LVEF recovers. Colors correspond to Table 3 . CRT
indicates cardiac resynchronization therapy; EF, ejection fraction; GDMT, guideline-directed management and therapy; HCM, hypertrophic cardio myopathy;
ICD, implantable cardioverter-de ﬁbrillator; LBBB, left bundle branch block; LVAD, left ventricular assist device; LVEF, left ventricular ejection fraction; and
NYHA, New York Heart Association.JACC VOL. 83, NO. 23, 2024 Ommen et al
JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –2405 2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline2369

Recommendations for Manageme nt of Patients With HCM and AF
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In patients with HCM and clinical AF, anticoagulation is recommended with direct-acting oral anticoagu-
lants (DOACs) as ﬁrst-line option and vitamin K antagonists as second-line option, independent of
CHA 2DS2-VASc score.1-5
1 C-LD2. In patients with HCM and subclinical AF detected by internal or external cardiac device or monitor of
>24 hours ’duration for a given episode, anticoagulation is recommended with DOACs as ﬁrst-line option
and vitamin K antagonists as second-line option, independent of CHA 2DS2-VASc score.1,6-8
1 C-LD3. In patients with AF in whom rate control strategy is p lanned, beta blockers, ver apamil, or diltiazem are
recommended, with the choice of agents according t o patient preferences and comorbid conditions.9,10
2a C-LD4. In patients with HCM and subclinical AF detected by internal or external device or monitor, of >5m i n u t e s ’
duration but <24 hours ’duration for a given episode, an ticoagulation with DOACs as ﬁrst-line option and
vitamin K antagonists as second-line option can be bene ﬁcial, taking into consideration duration of AF
episodes, total AF burden, underlyin g risk factors, and bleeding risk.1,6-8,11
2a B-NR5. In patients with HCM and poorly tolerated AF, a rhyth m-control strategy with cardioversion or antiar-
rhythmic drugs can be bene ﬁcial with the choice of an agent according to AF symptom severity, patient
preferences, and comorbid conditions.9,12-24
2a B-NR6. In patients with HCM and symptomatic AF, as part of an AF rhythm- control strategy, catheter ablation for AF
can be effective when drug therapy is ineffe ctive, contraindicated, or not the patient ’s preference.12,25,26
2a B-NR7. In patients with HCM and AF who require surgical myec tomy, concomitant surgical AF ablation procedure
can be bene ﬁcial for AF rhythm control.13,27-29LVADs results in acceptable outcomes in highly
selected patients with HCM.15-19Post-LVAD survival is
superior in patients with HCM and larger LV cavities(>46-50 mm).
17,18Only a small number of patients with
HCM have received an LVAD as destination therapy,
perhaps due to the younger age of this population
relative to those with dilated cardiomyopathy (mean,52 versus 57 years).
18Limited data are available on the
role of temporary or biventri cular mechanical circula-
tory support in patients with HCM. Data on the role ofmechanical circulatory support in children with HCMare similarly limited. One study of 20 children withadvanced HF with preserved EF, including 3 patients
with HCM, showed poor surv ival, with only 50% either
successfully weaned or bridged to transplantation.
42
8. Patients with HCM were not included in the primary
prevention ICD trials for patients with HF. A retro-spective study of 706 patients with nonobstructiveHCM demonstrated a 68% lower mortality rate over 5y e a r si np a t i e n t sw i t hI C D s ;h o w e v e r ,o n l y1 1 %h a da nICD, 8% had EF #50%, and speci ﬁcc a u s e so fd e a t h
were not provided, precluding a causal association.
3
Among patients with HCM whose EF was 35% to 50%
a n dw h oh a da nI C D ,9 %t o1 7 %r e c e i v e da p p r o p r i a t eICD therapies, and sudden death event rates wereapproximately 2.5% per year.
2,20,28Therefore, pro-
phylactic ICD implantation is the generally acceptedclinical practice for patients with HCM and systolic
dysfunction (EF #50%).1SHaRe (Sarcomeric Human
Cardiomyopathy Registry) further demonstrated agraded spectrum of risk with a very high burden ofmalignant arrhythmias in those with EF <35%.
28In the
pediatric population, small body size may impact the
feasibility and risk of ICD implantation and should betaken into account when discussing ICD implantation.
9. CRT is established to improve symptoms, reduce HF
hospitalizations, and increase survival in patients withHF with EF #35% and LBBB with QRS duration $150
ms.
1Whether the same bene ﬁts apply to patients with
HCM is unclear. Patients with HCM were speci ﬁcally
excluded from some RCTs of CRT in HF,43,44and, in
others, the proportion of patients with HCM was notclearly de ﬁned.
45,46Furthermore, case series offer
conﬂi c t i n gr e s u l t so nt h ee f f e c to fC R To ns y m p t o m s ,
EF, and survival.21-25Future studies are needed to
identify CRT responders and establish disease-speci ﬁc
eligibility criteria. Thus, the usefulness of CRT in pa-tients with HCM and reduced EF is not well estab-
lished, but CRT may improve symptoms and LV
chamber dimensions in select patients.
8.4. Management of Patients With HCM and AFOmmen et al J A C CV O L .8 3 ,N O .2 3 ,2 0 2 4
2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –24052370

Synopsis
AF, commonly observed in patients with HCM, is
associated with signi ﬁcant morbidity, impaired quality of
life, and substantial stroke risk. Therapy includes pre-vention of thromboembolic events and controlling
symptoms. Traditional stroke risk scoring systems used in
the general population are not predictive in patients withHCM. Vitamin K antagonists are effective for stroke pre-vention, and recent studies support the use of DOACs aswell.
1-5Asymptomatic AF detected by cardiac devices or
monitors also increases risk of stroke, so the decision toanticoagulate should take into consideration the durationof episodes as well as underlying risk factors. When a
rhythm-control strategy is needed, several antiar-
rhythmic drugs have been shown to be safe and effective,allowing for individualization according to underlyingsubstrate and patient preference. Catheter ablation is alsoan option, although the procedure is less effective than inthe general population, and there is a more frequent needof repeat procedures and concomitant use of antiar-rhythmic drugs. Surgical AF ablation is a potential rhythm
management option in patients undergoing surgical
myectomy. Other supraventricular arrhythmias and atrialﬂutter are likely not increased in incidence in patients
with HCM, and treatment is usually similar to populationswithout HCM.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Clinical AF is AF that causes symptoms for which pa-
tients seek medical attention. Although no RCTs have
been published, the risk of systemic embolization ishigh in patients with HCM with AF. A meta-analysisthat included 33 studies and 7381 patients revealedan overall prevalence of thromboembolism in patientswith HCM with AF of 27.09% and incidence of 3.75 per10 patients.
1T h es t r o k er i s ki si n d e p e n d e n to f
CHA 2DS2-VASc score,30with a signi ﬁcant number of
strokes observed in patients with a score of 0. Several
studies have shown that anticoagulation, particularlywarfarin with target international normalized ratio 2 to3, reduces the stroke ri sk in this population,
2,30
whereas other publications have shown DOACs to be
at least as effective as warfarin, with additional ad-vantages reported, such as improved patient satisfac-tion and long-term outcomes.
3-5Although left atrial
appendage occlusion devic es have been evaluated in
populations, the number of patients with HCM in thesetrials was limited. Thus, the role of left atriala p p e n d a g eo c c l u s i o nd e v i c e si nH C Mr e m a i n su n -tested. The recommendations for anticoagulation ofpatients with atrial ﬂutter are the same as those for
patients with AF.
14
2. Similar to patients without HCM, asymptomatic or
subclinical AF (SCAF) is detected by cardiac devices inpatients with HCM as well. SCAF was reported in 16 of
30 patients with HCM (53%) after a median follow-up of595 days.
7Device-detected AF was identi ﬁed in 29 of
114 patients with HCM (25%), resulting in an annual-ized incidence of 4% per year.
6In patients without
HCM, SCAF has been associated with an increased risk
of thromboembolism, albeit lower than the riskdescribed for clinical AF.
8Considerable debate exists
regarding the AF duration threshold for initiating
anticoagulation in SCAF because the duration used todeﬁn ea n dq u a n t i f yA Fv a r i e ds i g n i ﬁcantly between
different studies. Nevertheless, the data increasinglyshow that longer duration ep isodes are associated with
greatest risk. One study suggested only episodes >24
hours were associated with increased risk.
15Also
inﬂuencing risk are the total AF burden11and the
presence of traditional risk factors, whereas very shortepisodes lasting a few seconds do not appear to in-crease risk.
16,17When making the diagnosis of device-
detected AF, review of stored intracardiac ECGs isessential to exclude artifact or false-positives.
3. Given the poor tolerance of AF in patients with HCM, a
rhythm-control strategy is often preferred, becausedata support improved outcomes with a rhythm-control strategy compared w ith historical controls.
9,10
For those patients for whom a rate-control strategy is
chosen (eg, because of patient choice, antiarrhythmicdrug failure, or intolerance), a nondihydropyridinecalcium channel blocker, a beta blocker, or a combi-
nation of the 2 is preferable. A theoretical concern ex-
ists that digoxin could exacerbate LVOTO attributableto a positive inotropic effect. However, in the absenceof a gradient, digoxin is a potential option, althoughdata on ef ﬁcacy in this population are lacking. Medi-
cation choice should be individually determined ac-cording to age, underlying substrate, comorbidities,and severity of symptoms. Dose adjustments are based
on the balance between adequate rate control versus
adverse effects, including excessive bradycardia. Inpatients with hypotension, dyspnea at rest, and veryhigh resting gradients (eg, >100 mm Hg), verapamil
should be avoided. Atrioventricular node ablation withpacemaker implantation can be a last option in re-fractory cases.
4. SCAF is often observed in patients with HCM and
implanted cardiac devices
6,7and has been associated
with an increased risk of thromboembolism.8Yet, the
minimum duration of SCAF that confers increased riskhas not been precisely de ﬁned, because a gradient of
risk appears to be evident depending on underlyingsubstrate. Although ASSERT (Asymptomatic AtrialFibrillation and Stroke Evaluation in Pacemaker Pa-tients and the Atrial Fibrillation Reduction Atrial Pac-
ing Trial) data suggested only episodes >24 hoursJACC VOL. 83, NO. 23, 2024 Ommen et al
JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –2405 2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline2371

increased stroke risk,15other evidence suggests that
shorter duration episodes may pose a risk in patientswith traditional risks factors.
16In ASSERT, the absolute
stroke risk increased with increasing CHADS 2score,
reaching a rate of 3.78 per year in those with score >2.18
Another group strati ﬁed risk according to AF duration
and CHADS 2score, with a CHADS 2score of 1 increasing
the risk only if AF duration was >24 hours, whereas for
CHADS 2scores $2, episodes >5 minutes increased
risk.19Similar risk strati ﬁcation is unavailable in HCM,
yet risk factors for stroke in the population with HCMhave been identi ﬁed and include advancing age, pre-
vious embolic events, NYHA functional class, left atrial
diameter, vascular disease, and maximal LV wallthickness.
30When very short AF duration is observed,
continued surveillance should be maintained as theburden of AF is likely to progress.
5. Studies suggest that with current therapies, AF in pa-
tients with HCM can be managed effectively, leading tolow morbidity and mortality compared with historical
controls.
9,10In general, drug selection for rhythm
control in patients with HCM is based on extrapolationfrom studies of the AF population at large. Yet, reportssuggest several drugs are safe and effective in patientswith HCM ( Table 9 ). Amiodarone has been used over
many years and is generally deemed a favored op-tion.
10,20Disopyramide has been safely prescribed for
reduction of LVOTO, but its ef ﬁcacy in AF is not well
established.21,22Data on NYHA functional class IC
antiarrhythmic agents are limited because of concernsregarding their use in patients with structural heartdisease. When used, therapy with NYHA functionalc l a s sI Ca g e n t si ss a f e s ti nt h ep r e s e n c eo fa nI C D .
10
NYHA functional class III agents have been used aswell; a report in 25 patien ts with HCM showed dofeti-
lide to be well tolerated and facilitated AF manage-
ment.
13Sotalol has also been shown to be safe and is
commonly used in pediatric patients as well, either inoral or intravenous forms.23,24,31,32The U.S. Food and
Drug Administration –mandated safety precautions
should be adopted when prescribing antiarrhythmicdrugs.
6. Catheter ablation plays an important role in the man-
a g e m e n to fA Fi nH C M .A l t h o u g hn oR C T se x i s ti nt h i sarea, several meta-analy ses have been published in
patients with HCM undergoing catheter ablation fordrug refractory AF, including one that comparedcatheter ablation between patients with HCM versus acohort without HCM.
12,25In general, the procedure is
safe and remains an important tool. However, the re-
sults seem less favorable compared with patients
without HCM, with a 2-fold higher risk of relapse, morefrequent need of repeat procedures, and higher use ofconcomitant antiarrhythmic drugs. This is attributed tothe fact that patients with HCM have a greater degreeof electrophysiologic and structural remodeling thanthe population without HCM.
25Contributing factors for
atrial remodeling include LVOTO, diastolic impair-
ment, MR, and other factors. It can be postulated that
aggressive intervention in th e earlier stages of disease
would be more effective, but this is unproven, andongoing remodeling is expected. Some authors havesuggested the need for a more extensive ablationapproach, with linear lesions and ablation of triggersn o ta s s o c i a t e dw i t ht h ep u l m o n a r yv e i n so f t e nrequired to improve the long-term durability of the
procedure.
26
7. AF in patients with HCM is often poorly tolerated;
therefore, aggressive rhythm-control strategies aresometimes required. Because of the lower success rateof catheter ablation in patients with HCM comparedwith the general AF population, surgical AF ablation isa potential rhythm management option, especially inpatients already undergoing open heart surgery for a
surgical myectomy. In combi nation with surgical relief
of the LVOT gradient and MR, which can limit or evenTABLE 9 Antiarrhythmic Drug Therapy Options for Patients With HCM and AF
Antiarrhythmic Drug Ef ﬁcacy for AF Adverse Effects Toxicities Use in HCM
Disopyramide Modest Anticholinergic
HFProlonged QTc
TdPParticularly with early onset AF
Generally used in conjunction with atrioventricular nodal
blocking agents
Flecainide and propafenone . Prolonged QRS Proarrhythmia
Typical atrial ﬂutterNot generally recommended in the absence of an ICD
Sotalol Modest Fatigue Bradycardia Prolonged QTc
TdPReasonable
Dofetilide Modest Headache Prolonged QTc
TdPReasonable
Dronedarone Low HF Prolonged QTc .
Amiodarone Modest-high Bradycardia Liver, lung, thyroid, skin,
neurologic
Prolonged QTcReasonable
AF indicates atrial ﬁbrillation; HCM, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; HF, heart failure; ICD, implantable cardioverter-de ﬁbrillator; and TdP, torsades de pointes.Ommen et al J A C CV O L .8 3 ,N O .2 3 ,2 0 2 4
2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –24052372

Recommendations for the Management of Patients With HCM and Ventricular Arrhythmias
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In patients with HCM and recurrent, poorly tolerated life-threatening ventricular tachyarrhythmias re-
fractory to maximal antiarrhythmic drug therapy and ablation, heart transplantation assessment is indi-
cated in accordance with current listing criteria.1,2
1B-NR *2. In adults with HCM and symptomatic ventricular arrh ythmias or recurrent ICD shocks despite beta-blocker
use, antiarrhythmic drug therapy (eg, amiodarone, *dofetilide, †mexiletine, †or sotalol †)i sr e c o m m e n d e d ,
with the choice of agent guided by age, underlying comorbidities, severity of disease, patient preferences,
and balance between ef ﬁcacy and safety.3-6C-LD †
1 C-LD3. In children with HCM and recurrent ventricular arrhyt hmias despite beta-blocker use, antiarrhythmic drug
therapy (eg, amiodarone,3,4mexiletine,6sotalol3,4) is recommended, with the choice of agent guided by
age, underlying comorb idities, severity of disease, pati ent preferences, and balance of ef ﬁcacy and safety.
1 C-LD4. In patients with HCM and pacing-capable ICDs, pro gramming antitachycardia pacing is recommended to
minimize risk of shocks.7,8
2a C-LD5. In patients with HCM and recurrent symptomatic s ustained monomorphic VT, or recurrent ICD shocks
despite optimal device programming, and in whom anti arrhythmic drug therapy is either ineffective, not
tolerated, or not preferred, catheter ablation can be useful for reducing arrhythmia burden.9-11
*Indicates the LOE for amiodarone. †Indicates the LOE for dofetilide, mexiletine, or sotalol.reverse negative atrial remodeling, concomitant sur-
gical AF ablation may be successful in decreasing AFburden. Several studies have reported satisfactorymidterm ef ﬁcacy, yet these reports universally include
a small number of patients, and the durability of the
procedure appears to decrease with time.
27,29In a
study that represents the largest series of patients withAF treated surgically, freedom from AF recurrence at 1year was 44% for ablation patients (n ¼49) and 75%w i t ht h em a z ep r o c e d u r e( n ¼72) ( P<0.001).
10In this
study, with concomitant surgical ablation, freedomfrom AF at 3 years was 70%, with left atrial size being apredictor of recurrence.
10
8.5. Management of Patients With HCM and Ventricular
Arrhythmias
Synopsis
In patients with HCM and ICDs, preventing recurrent VT
is an important goal of therapy, because ICD shocks havebeen associated with impaired quality of life and worseoutcomes.
12Most studies on secondary prevention of VT
are extrapolated from studies in patients without HCM
because data on VT management in patients with HCM arelimited. The choice of pharmacological therapy should beindividualized according to individual substrate, butamiodarone is generally considered superior, albeit at theexpense of increased adverse effects and with no effect onoverall survival. Programming ICDs with antitachycardiapacing may minimize risk of shocks because monomorphic
VT and ventricular ﬂutter are common. In cases refractory
to antiarrhythmic drugs and to optimal ICD programming,catheter ablation is an option.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Referral for transplantation should be in accordance
with current guidelines.
13Transplant referral does not
absolutely require reduced EF, because patients withp r e s e r v e dE Fm a ya l s od e v e l o pa d v a n c e dH Fw i t h
restrictive physiology or i ntractable ventricular
arrhythmias.1,2
2. Most patients with HCM and VT are likely already
receiving beta blockers, generally the ﬁrst treatment
option. Because no study has investigated pharmaco-
logical therapies for pre venting ICD shocks speci ﬁcally
in the population with HCM, recommendations areextrapolated from studies that enrolled different dis-ease substrates. In the OPTI C (Optimal Pharmacological
Therapy in Cardioverter De ﬁbrillator Patients) trial, 412
patients with documented ventricular arrhythmiaswere randomized to amioda rone plus beta blocker,
sotalol, or beta blocker alone. At 1 year, shocks occurred
in 38.5% assigned to beta blocker alone, 24.3% assignedto sotalol, and 10.3% assigned to amiodarone plus betablocker.
3Thus, amiodarone was most effective but at
the expense of increased adverse effects.3In an obser-
vational study that included 30 patients, dofetilide wasfound to decrease the number of ICD therapies evenafter other agents were ineffective.
5P r o o fo fe f ﬁcacyJACC VOL. 83, NO. 23, 2024 Ommen et al
JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –2405 2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline2373

for mexiletine is limited but is often adjunctive to
amiodarone.6A meta-analysis that involved 8 studies
and 2268 patients con ﬁrmed that the bene ﬁto fa n t i -
arrhythmic drug therapy was driven mainly by amio-darone, with no effect o n overall survival.
4The safety
and ef ﬁcacy of propafenone and ﬂecainide is uncer-
t a i n ,i na d d i t i o nt os a f e t yc o n c e r n sw h e nu s e di np a -tients with ischemic heart disease.
14
3. In pediatric patients with HCM, recurrent episodes of
VT are generally treate dw i t hb e t ab l o c k e r sa s ﬁrst-line
therapy. If VT is recurrent (with greater emphasisplaced on episodes that are faster or longer and thosethat may trigger ICD shocks), additional antiarrhythmic
agents may be used either to address symptoms, sup-
press recurrent life-threatening events, or to preventunnecessary ICD shocks. Drugs with risk for proar-rhythmia are often initiated in the hospital. ICDshocks, even when appropriate, have been linked topsychological trauma in pediatric patients, and thus itis reasonable to consider management options thatminimize shocks. For children with recurrent ICD
shocks despite maximal antiarrhythmic therapy, data
regarding alternative therapies such as catheter abla-tion are limited. Sympathetic denervation has beenreported, although data are limited to case reports.
15-17
4. ICD therapy has been shown to prevent SCD and
improve survival in patients with HCM.18Historically,
it has been the general belief that the mechanism ofSCD in this population was VF. Yet, it appears that
ventricular arrhythmias amenable to termination by
antitachycardia pacing, including monomorphic VTand ventricular ﬂu t t e r ,a r em o r ec o m m o nt h a np r e v i -
ously thought. Among 71 patients with HCM and ICDswho received appropriate therapies, 74 were VF, 18ventricular ﬂutter, and 57 were for monomorphic VT.
Further, when antitachycardia pacing was available, itwas successful in 74% of episodes.
7This is especially
important in those at risk for monomorphic VT, such asthose with apical aneurysms , although patients with
fast ventricular arrhythmias may bene ﬁt as well.
5. In patients with HCM and recurrent ventricular ar-
rhythmias, despite pharmacological therapy, addi-
tional therapies are required. Of 22 patients whounderwent ablation, there was a 73% success rate withno major complications; of note, epicardial ablationwas required in 58%.
9Freedom from VT 12 months
postablation was found in 11 of 14 patients with VT andapical aneurysms, which is a common source of sus-tained monomorphic VT in this population,
10and 78%
VT-free survival was reported after combined epicar-
dial and endocardial ablation in 9 patients with sus-tained monomorphic VT.
11Therefore, it appears that in
selected patients with HCM, combined epicardial and
endocardial ablation is a reasonably safe and effectiveoption for treating monomorphic VT refractory toantiarrhythmic drugs and to optimal ICD programming.A recent meta-analysis that included 6 studies
conﬁrmed the ﬁndings.
19In 1 case series, surgical
aneurysmectomy proved effective in 3 patients withapical aneurysms and incess ant ventricular arrhyth-
mias as an alternative to ablation.
20In pediatric pa-
tients, age and heart size must be taken into accountwhen considering ablation. An additional option incases of refractory VT/VF is left cardiac sympatheticdenervation, which has ef ﬁcacy in individual case
reports.
15
9. LIFESTYLE CONSIDERATIONS FOR PATIENTS
WITH HCM
9.1. Recreational Physical Activity and Competitive Sports
Recommendations for Recreational Physical Activity and Competitive Sports
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-R1. For patients with HCM, mild- to moderate-intensity *recreational †exercise is bene ﬁcial to improve
cardiorespiratory ﬁtness, physical functioning, and quality of l ife, and for overall health in keeping with
physical activity guidelines for the general population.1-3
1 C-EO2. For athletes with HCM, a comprehensive evaluation a nd shared decision-making about sports participation
with an expert professional is recommended.4
2a B-NR3. In individuals who are genotype-positive, phenotype- negative for HCM, participation in competitive sports
of any intensity is reasonable.5,6
2a B-NR4. For patients with HCM, participation in vigorous *recreational activities is reasonable after an annual
comprehensive evaluation and shared decision-making with an expert professional who balances potential
bene ﬁts and risks.4,5,7,8Ommen et al J A C CV O L .8 3 ,N O .2 3 ,2 0 2 4
2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –24052374

Synopsis
Regular physical activity promotes longevity and re-
duces overall cardiovascular disease risk. Most patientswith HCM can bene ﬁtf r o ma tl e a s tm i l d -t om o d e r a t e -
intensity exercise. Some patients with HCM who haveno or minimal symptomatic limitation are capable ofvigorous activities or competitive sports and place a highpersonal value on physical ﬁtness, performance, or both.
Recommendations for recreational exercise and compet-
itive sports for patients with HCM are evolving with
emergence of data and emphasis on promoting patientautonomy and shared decision-making.
4,17,18Although
previous observational studies identify HCM as a commoncause of SCD among competitive athletes,
19in prospective
registries, HCM is the cause of SCD in <10% of young in-
dividuals, including athletes.20-31Although uncertainty
around the risk of SCD associated with exercise exists, a
disproportionate risk of SCD has not been demonstrated
in athletes in contemporary registries.5,11-13 ,30Although
these data provide some reassurance, the nuances andunique individual considerat ions regarding vigorous ex-
ercise or competitive sports warrant annual evaluation byan expert professional, including a shared balanced dis-cussion of potential bene ﬁts and risks and an individual
emergency preparedness plan.
4,17,18,32,33
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Inactivity is prevalent among patients with HCM.34,35
“The Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans ”
recommend that adults engage in at least 150 to 300minutes of moderate-intensity or 75 to 150 minutes ofvigorous-intensity aerobi ce x e r c i s ew e e k l y ,a n dt h a t
children engage in at least 60 minutes of moderate-to-
vigorous exercise daily.
36In a randomized trial of ex-
ercise training, adult patients with HCM who followedprescriptions of moderate-intensity exercise for 4m o n t h s ,c o m p a r e dw i t ht h o s ed o i n gt h e i ru s u a la c t i v -ity, showed signi ﬁcant improvements in peak oxygen
consumption and subjective improvements in physicalfunctioning.
1No major adverse events and no increase
in nonlethal arrhythmias with exercise training were
observed. Exercise intensity can be gauged by METs:light<3 METs, moderate 3 to 6 METs, and vigorous >6
METs,
15by percentage of maximu m heart rate achieved
(light 40%-50%, moderate 50%-70%, vigorous >70%),
or by level of perceived exertion on the Borg scale(light 7-12, moderate 13-14, vigorous $15).
16An initial
period of supervised exercise may be warranted in
s o m ep a t i e n t s .C h i l d r e nw i t hH C Mc a nt y p i c a l l y
participate in physical education at school, with anoption not to grade, time, or score for performance.
2. Expert professionals will be familiar with the evidence
and ongoing studies relevant to discussions aboutvigorous exercise and sport s participation and will be
in the best position to provide guidance in the contextof shared decision-making.
4Advice to avoid dehydra-
tion or exposures to extreme environmental conditions
(eg, heat, humidity) is important, particularly for pa-tients with obstructive physiology. This discussion alsoprovides an opportunity to devise plans for emergencypreparedness.
3. Sudden death in genotype- positive, phenotype-nega-
tive individuals is rare.
6Currently, no accurate risk
prediction models for SCD in genotype-positive,
phenotype-negative individuals are available. In a
recent prospective registry, no arrhythmic events wereobserved in genotype-positive, phenotype-negativeindividuals (total of 126), including those exercisingvigorously or participating in competitive athletics.
5
Decisions about participation in competitive sportsare usually made jointly with the patient and familytaking into consideration family history of SCD, type of
sports activity, and patient and family risk tolerance.
Because of the low risk of sudden death, phenotype-negative individuals are not restricted from competi-tive sports and are not routinely monitored withambulatory electrocardiog raphy and exercise stress
testing unless the family history indicates a high risk2b B-NR5 .F o rp a t i e n t sw i t hH C Mw h oa r ec a p a b l eo fah i g hl evel of physical performance, participation in
competitive sports †may be considered after review by an expe rt provider with experience managing
athletes with HCM who conducts an annual comprehe nsive evaluation and shar ed decision-making that
balances potential bene ﬁts and risks.5,9-14
3: No bene ﬁt B-NR6. For most patients with HCM, univers al restriction from vigorous physica l activity or competitive sports is
not indicated.5,11-13
3: Harm C-EO7. In patients with HCM, ICD placement for the sole purp ose of participation in competitive sports should not
be performed.10
*Exercise intensity can be gauged by metabolic equivalents (METs): light <3 METs, moderate 3-6 METs, and vigorous >6 METs,15by percentage of maximum heart rate achieved (light 40%-50%,
moderate 50%-70%, vigorous >70%), or by level of perceived exertion on the Borg scale (light 7-12, moderate 13-14, vigorous $15).16
†Recreational exercise is done for the purpose of leisure with no requirement for systematic training and without the purpose to excel or compete again st others. Competitive sports involve
systematic training for the primary purpose of competition against others, at multiple levels, including high school, collegiate, master ’s level, semiprofessional, or professional sporting activities.JACC VOL. 83, NO. 23, 2024 Ommen et al
JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –2405 2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline2375

for SCD or as part of precompetitive athletic screening.
This is appropriate every 1 to 2 years to assess safety ofongoing competitive athletics participation.
4. Many patients with HCM with no or minimal symp-
tomatic limitation are capable of vigorous-intensity
exercise and place a high personal value on physical
ﬁtness. Retrospective data have not shown a higher
rate of ventricular arrhythmias in individuals withHCM who exercise vigorously.
7Additionally, a pro-
spective nationwide population-based cohort study inSouth Korea showed that among individuals with adiagnosis of HCM (mean age, 59 years), those in thehighest tertile of exercise (including those exercising
vigorously $8 METs) had the lowest cardiovascular
mortality (2.7% versus 3.8% in midtertile and 4.7% inlowest tertile; P<0.001).
8In a recently published
prospective observational registry of adult and pedi-atric patients (8-60 years of age) with HCM who wereNYHA functional class I to II, those who engaged invigorous exercise were not more likely to experiencean arrhythmic event compared with those exercising
moderately or who were less active.
5Notably, most
patients in this study were managed at experiencedHCM centers and receiving close follow-up and sur-veillance. Therefore, although these data can informdiscussion between patients and physicians regardingparticipation in vigorous exercise, these discussionsshould occur in the context of an annual comprehen-sive clinical evaluation and risk assessment using an
individualized shared decision-making framework by
an expert professional with experience in managingpatients with HCM.
5. Some patients with HCM who have no or minimal
symptomatic limitation are capable of vigorous-intensity training and place a high personal value onphysical performance for the purpose of competition.Prospective studies over the past decade have
demonstrated a similar burd en of ventricular arrhyth-
mias in adult patients with HCM who have continuedto engage in competitive athletics compared with thosewho have withdrawn from competition.
11-13In thoseathletes with ICDs, shock rates in athletes with HCM
are similar to those reported in nonathletic pop-ulations, with most shocks occurring outside trainingor competition, and with no reported shock-related
injuries or death.
9,10A large prospective registry
examined the impact of recreational exercise and
competitive athletics o n arrhythmic events and
included 259 individuals eng aging in competitive ath-
letics, including 42 high school and collegiate athleteswith HCM with >3y e a r s ’follow-up. Competitive ath-
letes with HCM did not experience an increasedarrhythmic risk compared with individuals exercisingmoderately or not at all.
5Although these data provide
some reassurance and can inform discussions between
patients and physicians regarding participation incompetitive athletics, not all types of athletes are well-represented in these studies. Evaluations and shareddecision-making with athletes who have HCMregarding sports participation should therefore beindividualized, be undertaken by professionals withexpertise in managing compe titive athletes with HCM,
and be repeated on at least an annual basis.
4,32Final
eligibility decisions for org anized sports participation
may involve third parties (eg, team physicians, con-sultants, institutional leadership) acting on the behalfof schools or teams.
6. Prospective studies to date have suggested that pa-
tients with HCM who engage in competitive athleticsare not at increased risk of SCD compared with less
active individuals,
5or athletes who withdraw from
competitive sports.11-13
7. Sudden death risk strati ﬁcation and recommendations
f o rI C Dp l a c e m e n ts h o u l db em a d ei na c c o r d a n c ew i t hthe algorithm put forth in this guideline, independentof decisions regarding sports participation. Inappro-priate ICD utilization would expose patients unneces-sarily to device-related complications and should be
avoided.
37,38
9.2. Occupation in Patients With HCM
Recommendations for Occupation in Patients With HCM
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
2a C-EO1. For patients with HCM, it is reasonable to follow Fed eral Motor Carrier Safety Administration cardiovas-
cular disease guidelines that permit driving commercial motor vehicles, if they do not have an ICD or any
major risk factors for SCD and are using a GDMT plan.1
2a C-EO2. For pilot aircrew with a diagnosis of HCM, it is rea sonable to follow Federal Aviation Administration
guidelines that permit consideration of multicrew ﬂying duties, provided they are asymptomatic, are
deemed low risk for SCD, and can complete a maximal treadmill stress test at 85% peak heart rate.2
2b C-EO3. It is reasonable for patients with HC M to consider occupations that require manual labor, heavy lifting, or a
high level of physical performance after a comp rehensive clinical evaluation, risk strati ﬁcation for SCD, and
implementation of GDMT in the context of shared decision-making.Ommen et al J A C CV O L .8 3 ,N O .2 3 ,2 0 2 4
2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –24052376

Synopsis
Several occupational considerations are important for
patients with HCM, particularly when potential for loss ofconsciousness could occur that can place the patient orothers in a harmful situation. For some occupations
(commercial driving and piloting an aircraft), federal
guidelines and restrictions cannot be superseded by thisguideline.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. The Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration
updated its guidelines in 2015.
1A permit for driving a
commercial vehicle can be obtained by patients with
HCM who do not have an ICD and do not possess any of
the major risk factors for SCD (see Section 7 ,“SCD Risk
Assessment and Prevention ”).2. The Federal Aviation Admini stration guidelines do not
explicitly list HCM as a disqualifying diagnosis forpiloting an aircraft. However, a report from an occu-pational aviation work group states that for patientswith HCM who are asymptomatic, they may be
considered for multicrew ﬂying duties.
2No restrictions
exist for patients with HCM to be nonpilot aircrew.
3. Occupations that require considerable heavy manual
labor (eg, construction work) or a high level of physicalperformance (eg, law enforcement, ﬁreﬁghters) may
impose some risk to patients with HCM but alsopotentially to a coworker or the public, in the event ofloss of consciousness. Therefore, these decisions
should be approached on an individual basis and in the
context of shared decision-making.
9.3. Pregnancy in Patients With HCM
Recommendations for Pregnancy in Patients With HCM
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. For pregnant women with HCM and AF or other indicat ions for anticoagulation, low-molecular-weight
heparin or vitamin K antagonists (at maximum therapeutic dose of <5 mg daily) are recommended for
stroke prevention.1,2
1 C-LD2. In pregnant women with HCM, selected beta blocker s should be administered for symptoms related to
outﬂow tract obstruction or arrhythmias, with monitoring of fetal growth.3,4
1 C-LD3. In most pregnant women with HCM, vaginal delivery is recommended as the ﬁrst-choice delivery option.3,5
1 B-NR4. In affected families with HCM, preconceptional and prenatal reproductive and genetic counseling should
be offered.3-6
1 C-EO5. For pregnant women with HCM, care should be coordina ted between their cardiologist and an obstetrician.
For patients with HCM who are deemed high risk, consu ltation is advised with an expert in maternal-fetal
medicine.
2a C-LD6. For women with clinically stable HCM who wish to become pregnant, it is reasonable to advise that
pregnancy is generally safe as part of a shared discuss ion regarding potential maternal and fetal risks, and
initiation of GDMT.7-10
2a C-LD7. In pregnant women with HCM, cardioversion for new or recurrent AF, particularly if symptomatic, is
reasonable.6,11
2a C-LD8. In pregnant women with HCM, general or epidural an esthesia is reasonable, with precautions to avoid
hypotension.8
2a C-EO9. In pregnant women with HCM, it is reasonable to perform serial echocardiography, particularly during the
second or third trimester when hemodynamic loa d is highest, or if clinical symptoms develop.
2b C-EO10. In pregnant women with HCM, fetal echocardiogra phy may be considered for diagnosis of fetal HCM in
the context of prenatal counseling.
3: Harm C-EO11. In pregnant women, use of mavacamten is contrain dicated due to potential teratogenic effects.JACC VOL. 83, NO. 23, 2024 Ommen et al
JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –2405 2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline2377

Synopsis
Pregnancy in most women with HCM is well tolerated.
M a t e r n a lm o r t a l i t yi sv e r yl o w ,w i t ho n l y3s u d d e nd e a t h sreported in the literature, all in high-risk (and 1 undiag-nosed) patients, over the past 17 years.
7-10Symptoms
(dyspnea, chest pain, palpitations) and complications (HF
and arrhythmias) occur in approximately 25% of pregnantwomen with HCM for whom most had symptoms pre-ceding their pregnancy. No difference in outcomes wasreported for women with LVOTO compared with thosewithout obstruction.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. AF is associated with stroke in HCM and can be
mitigated by anticoagulation.
12-14Both low-
molecular-weight heparin and low-dose warfarincarry acceptable risk during pregnancy
2and should
be administered in accordance with the 2020 ACC/AHA valvular heart disease guideline.
1Insuf ﬁcient
safety data regarding DOACs in pregnancy areavailable, and a recent meta-analysis suggests that
they are associated with a higher rate of fetal
complications compared with low-molecular-weightheparin or warfarin.
15
2. Most beta blockers (ie, metoprolol, bisoprolol, labe-
talol, pindolol, propranolol) are generally consideredsafe to use during pregnancy; however, atenolol hassome evidence of potential fetal risk. Closer moni-toring of fetal growth and surveillance for fetal
bradycardia may be considered for pregnant women
on beta blockers.
3,4
3. In pregnant women with cardiovascular disease,
including cardiomyopathies, adverse outcomes dur-ing delivery are low (3%-4%) and similar betweenvaginal delivery and cesarean section.
5Valsalva ma-
neuver during labor has also been shown to be welltolerated. Bleeding rates, i ncluding serious bleeding
requiring transfusions, are higher in women who un-
dergo cesarean section. Therefore, cesarean sectionshould be reserved only for obstetric reasons or foremergency cardiac or other maternal health reasons. Adelivery plan should ideally be established by the endof the second trimester.
4. Prenatal genetic counseling is helpful in explaining
the risk of transmission of disease, as well as discus-
sing potential reproductive options. These reproduc-
tive options include preimpl antation genetic testing,
fetal screening, prenatal testing, and postnatal ge-netic testing. The bene ﬁts and potential harms can be
d i s c u s s e df o re a c ho ft h e s eo p t i o n s ,s u c ht h a tt h eindividual or couple can make a fully informed deci-
sion about prenatal genetic testing and fetalscreening.
3-6
5. A multidisciplinary care team that includes cardiolo-
gists and maternal-fetal medicine specialists can
provide comprehensive management of pregnant
women with HCM.
6. Decisions regarding pregnancy in women with HCM
include a shared discussion that conveys thatmaternal mortality with pregnancy is very low, andcardiac events occur primarily in those with preex-isting symptoms and previous cardiac events.
7-10In
those women who are very symptomatic, options for
mitigating risk before conception are discussed.
Depending on the individual circumstance, these op-tions might include SRT for women with medicallyrefractory symptomatic LVOTO, advanced HF thera-pies for women with HF, or ICD implantation forwomen with high-risk features for ventriculararrhythmias.
7. Some antiarrhythmic agents are contraindicated dur-
ing pregnancy because of potential teratogenic ef-
fects, while others are not recommended for patientswith HCM. Cardioversion during pregnancy can beperformed with minimal risk to the fetus and is
therefore preferred for restoring sinus rhythm inpregnant women with HCM, particularly if they aresymptomatic.
6Anticoagulation to decrease the risk of
thromboembolism associated with cardioversion
would need to be individualized based on the
trimester of pregnancy and the risk of anticoagulationto the fetus.
8. Epidural and general anesthesia are common modes
of anesthesia to make the delivery more comfortablefor the patient. There are generally no contraindica-tions to either of these forms of anesthesia in preg-nant patients with HCM as long as care is taken to
avoid hypotension.
8
9. Most complications that arise during pregnancy occur
in the third trimester. Therefore, it would be reason-able to perform echocardiography in the latter stagesof pregnancy or if new symptoms arise.
10. Fetal echocardiography is available for prenatal diag-
n o s i so fH C Ma n di su s e di ns o m es e l e c tf a m i l i e s ,particularly if a history of pediatric disease onset or
severe disease manifestations in parents or other
family members are present.
11. Myosin inhibitors may cause fetal toxicity when
administered to a pregnant woman, based on unpub-lished ﬁndings in animal studies.
16Ommen et al J A C CV O L .8 3 ,N O .2 3 ,2 0 2 4
2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –24052378

9.4. Patients With Comorbidities
Synopsis
Comorbid conditions, including hypertension, obesity,
a n ds l e e p - d i s o r d e r e db r e a t h i n g ,a r ec o m m o ni np a t i e n t swith HCM and may contribute to increased symptomburden, LVOTO, HF, and AF. Appropriate counseling andmanagement of these conditions in patients with HCM is acritical component of their care.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Patients with HCM are frequently affected by other
health conditions, includi ng hypertension, diabetes,
hyperlipidemia, and obesity, and may also maintainunhealthy lifestyle practices, including inactivity andtobacco abuse, which together can compromise theiroverall cardiovascular health. In addition to treatment
of their HCM, implementation of well-proven primary
prevention strategies is warranted in symptomatic andasymptomatic patients.
1
2. Excess weight is very common in adult patients
with HCM, with >70% having a body mass index of
>25 kg/m2and>30% having a body mass index of
>30 kg/m2.2-4Obesity is also common in pediatric
patients with HCM, with almost 30% having a body
mass index in the 99th perc entile for age and sex.9Pa-
tients who are obese have an increased burden of LVHand mass,
2,3,9are more symptomatic, are more likely to
have LVOTO, and have reduced exercise capacity.2-4In
a large prospective, multicenter registry of patientswith HCM, obesity was independently associated with acomposite outcome of death, HF, AF, ventricular ar-rhythmias, and stroke, with hazard ratios ranging from
1.4 to 1.9.
4Although patients who were obese were lesslikely to carry a sarcomere gene variant, obesity
increased risk in genotype-positive and genotype-negative patients. Obesity is also associated withincreased susceptibility for developing HCM ingenotype-negative patients.
10Weight loss in-
terventions in patients who are obese with HCM there-fore have the potential to reduce symptoms and adverse
outcomes, in addition to being an important component
of primary prevention for overall cardiovascular health.
3. Hypertension is commonly coexistent in adult patients
with HCM, with a prevalence of approximately 35% to50%, and affects sarcomere variant-negative patientsdisproportionately.
11,12Intuitively, LV pressure over-
load imposed by elevated systemic blood pressurecould trigger the onset of, or exacerbate, LVH. Hyper-
tension has been associated with increased penetrance
in gene variant carriers,
13and diastolic hypertension is
associated with a 4-fold risk of developing HCM ingenotype-negative individuals.
10Target blood pres-
sure should be in keeping with ACC/AHA primaryprevention guideline.
1In patients with symptomatic
obstructive HCM, beta blockers or nondihydropyridinecalcium channel blockers are often used as ﬁrst-line
therapy. Low-dose diuretics may also be used as anti-
hypertensive agents. Although some patients withobstructive physiology may tolerate vasodilator ther-apy, these agents can exacerbate LVOTO and symp-toms. In younger patients with nonobstructive HCMdue to a pathogenic or likely pathogenic cardiacsarcomere genetic variant, who have concomitant hy-
pertension, valsartan may be a good option because of
its potential to slow disease progression.
14Recommendations for Patients With Comorbidities
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 C-EO1. In patients with HCM, adherence to the ACC/AHA primary prevention guideline is recommended to reduce
risk of cardiovascular events.1
1 B-NR2. In patients with HCM who are overweight or obese, coun seling and comprehensive lifestyle interventions
are recommended for achieving and maintaining weight loss1and possibly lowering the risk of developing
LVOTO, HF, and AF.2-4
1 C-LD3. In patients with HCM and hy pertension, lifestyle modi ﬁcations and medical therapy for hypertension are
recommended,1with preference for beta blockers and nondihydropyridine calcium channel blockers in
patients with obstructive HCM.
1 C-LD4. In patients with HCM, assessment for symptoms of s leep-disordered breathing is recommended, and, if
present, referral to a sleep medicine specialist for evaluation and treatment is recommended.5-8JACC VOL. 83, NO. 23, 2024 Ommen et al
JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –2405 2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline2379

4. Sleep-disordered breathing is highly prevalent in pa-
tients with HCM, affecting 55% to 70%. Patients withobstructive sleep apnea are older, more often hyper-tensive, and have greater symptom burden andreduced exercise capacity.
5,7Obstructive sleep apnea
has also been associated with a greater prevalence of
AF and NSVT.6,8Diagnosis and treatment of obstruc-
tive sleep apnea could reduce symptoms andarrhythmic complications in patients with HCM but hasnot been systematically tested.
10. EVIDENCE GAPS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
10.1. Re ﬁning the Diagnosis of HCM
The diagnosis of HCM is currently based on binary cut-
offs for LV wall thickness. However, due to imprecision
in measurement and variability based on sex, body size,and comorbidities, relying on this single dichotomousmetric will result in overdiagnosis in some groups andunderdiagnosis in others.
1Additionally, the phenotype of
HCM extends beyond LVH. Evolving toward a more mo-lecular or pathway-based approach to diagnosis, whenpossible, will enable greater d iagnostic accuracy, improve
patient strati ﬁcation, and facilitate implementation of
increasingly targ eted therapies.
10.2. Developing Therapies to Attenuate or Prevent Disease
Progression
Developing safe, effective medical therapy that can fore-
stall disease progression is a major therapeutic goal,either with existing medi cations (eg, valsartan)
1or
emerging medications (eg, cardiac myosin inhibitors).2If
the speci ﬁc genetic etiology is identi ﬁed, gene-based
therapies offer the potential for durably impacting dis-ease with a single intervention, and testing is starting in
humans. However, for disease-modifying and preventive
therapies to be established, much more robust and gran-ular understanding of diseas e pathogenesis is needed,
including identifying predictors of disease development,predictors of adverse outcomes, and intermediate phe-notypes that accurately track disease progression and, inturn, response to therapy.
10.3. Improving Care for Nonobstructive HCM
Managing patients with symptomatic nonobstructive
HCM remains a major clinical challenge. In contrast toobstructive HCM, where obstructive physiology can be
e f f e c t i v e l yt a r g e t e da n dt r e a t e dw i t hm e d i c a la n ds u r g i c a l
approaches,
1-5determining the driving pathophysiology
of nonobstructive HCM remains somewhat elusive. Dia-stolic abnormalities, including restrictive physiology andmyocardial energetics, are thought to be important butare currently not well addre ssed. The role of cardiacmyosin inhibitors in nonobstructive HCM is being inves-
tigated in clinical trials.
4With clinical bene ﬁt shown with
sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 inhibitors and mineralo-corticoid receptor antagon ists in patients with HF with
preserved EF, investigating whether patients with non-
obstructive HCM may also bene ﬁt will be important.
Clinical trials that test lifestyle interventions to reducesymptom burden are also needed. Given the bene ﬁts of
cardiopulmonary rehabilitation in other cardiac diseases,adding HCM to the list of reimbursable diagnoses wouldextend these bene ﬁts to this population.
10.4. Improving and Expanding Risk Strati ﬁcation
Despite several large, prospective studies
1-3examining
risk predictors of SCD, risk strati ﬁcation algorithms still
have low positive-predictive values such that many ICDsare placed unnecessarily. Conversely, sudden cardiac ar-rest or SCD occurs in patients with no established riskfactors, albeit rarely. New risk factors and tools toenhance the power of risk strati ﬁcation algorithms are
needed, particularly in children.
Similarly, the ability to predict which patients with
HCM will suffer other adverse outcomes, such as HF and
AF, is limited. Arti ﬁcial intelligence could prove useful in
screening, risk strati ﬁcation, and/or disease progression
monitoring. The presence, pa ttern, or progression of LGE
or abnormal 3D strain on CMR,
4-6alone or in concert with
other biomarkers such as troponin levels, may becomeuseful predictors but must be consistent with existingtools and show value against other risk metrics before
clinical adoption. These questions will bene ﬁtf r o m
continued assembly and growth of large, prospectiveregistries that track clinical outcomes in well-genotypedand -phenotyped patients wi th HCM. Studies including
larger numbers of pediatric a nd underrepresented racial
and ethnic group patients with HCM are particularlyneeded.
10.5. Arrhythmia Management
AF affects a large proportio n of adult patients with HCM,
is often poorly tolerated, and may be more refractory topharmacological and catheter -based interventions than in
patients without HCM.
1-5Further work is needed to
identify more robust predic tors of developing AF, re ﬁne
risk scores, and better stratify for thromboembolic com-plications.
6Technical advances in ablative therapy for AF
may increase the success rate in patients with HCM.7
10.6. Expanding Understanding of the Genetic Architecture
of HCM
Genetic evaluation and counseling are not widely avail-
able outside of experienced HCM centers. Greater accessto genetic counseling and testing, including expertinterpretation of results in the clinical context, is neededOmmen et al J A C CV O L .8 3 ,N O .2 3 ,2 0 2 4
2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –24052380

for all patients with HCM to advance individual care, to
improve family management, and to advance the knowl-edge base. Improved algorithms for the interpretation ofvariants that are currently classi ﬁed as variants of un-
certain signi ﬁcance are also evolving, including ongoing
efforts in expert variant cura tion by the Clinical Genome
Resource (ClinGen), a resource of the National Institutesof Health ( https://clinicalgenome.org/ ).
1
Approximately 50% of cases of HCM are genetically
elusive. New gene discovery is needed to identify addi-tional causal genes, recognizing that many of these casesresult from a combination of polygenic variants andenvironmental factors.
2,3Additionally, better under-
standing of the complex genetics underlying HCM and
developing polygenic risk scores will further advancepatient strati ﬁcation and family management, including
reﬁning longitudinal screening to be more limited in sit-
uations where the risk of heritable disease can be pre-dicted to be low. Investigation into the correlationsbetween genotype and phenotype and clinical outcomescontinues to be an important endeavor as the ﬁeld moves
toward more precise and tailored therapies —including
gene-speci ﬁct h e r a p e u t i c s .
PRESIDENTS AND STAFF
American College of Cardiology
Cathleen Biga, MSN, FACC, PresidentCathleen C. Gates, Chief Executive Of ﬁcer
Richard J. Kovacs, MD, MACC, Chief Medical Of ﬁcerMindy J. Saraco, MHA, Director, Clinical Policy and
Guidelines
G r a c eD .R o n a n ,S e n i o rP r o d u c t i o na n dO p e r a t i o n s
Manager, Clinical Policy Publications
Leah Patterson, Project Manager, Clinical Content
Development
American Heart Association/American College of Cardiology
Thomas S.D. Getchius, National Senior Director,
Guidelines
Abdul R. Abdullah, MD, Director, Guideline Science and
Methodology
Shae Martinez, MLS, Reference Consultant,
Medical Librarian
American Heart Association
J o s e p hC .W u ,P h D ,F A H A ,P r e s i d e n tNancy Brown, Chief Executive Of ﬁcer
Mariell Jessup, MD, FAHA, Chief Science and Medical
Ofﬁcer
Nicole Aiello Sapio, EdD, Executive Vice President, Of ﬁce
of Science Strategies and Operations
R a d h i k aR a j g o p a lS i n g h ,P h D ,S e n i o rV i c eP r e s i d e n t ,
Ofﬁce of Science and Medicine
Prashant Nedungadi, BPharm, PhD, Vice President,
Science and Medicine, Clinical Guidelines
Anne Leonard, MPH, BSN, RN, FAHA, National Senior
Director, Science and Medicine
Jody Hundley, Senior Production and Operations
Manager, Scienti ﬁc Publications, Of ﬁce of Science
OperationsJACC VOL. 83, NO. 23, 2024 Ommen et al
JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –2405 2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline2381

REFERENCES
PREAMBLE
1.Committee on Standards for Developing Trustworthy
Clinical Practice Guidelines, Institute of Medicine (US) .
Clinical Practice Guidelines We Can Trust . National
Academies Press; 2011 .
2.Committee on Standards for Systematic Reviews of
Comparative Effectiveness Research, Institute of Medi-
cine (US) .Finding What Works in Health Care: Standards
for Systematic Reviews . National Academies Press; 2011 .
3.Anderson JL, Heidenreich PA, Barnett PG, et al.
ACC/AHA statement on cost/value methodology inclinical practice guidelines and performance measures:a report of the American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association Task Force on Perfor-
mance Measures and Task Force on Practice Guide-lines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;63:2304 –2322 .
4.ACCF/AHA Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Meth-
odology Manual and Policies From the ACCF/AHA TaskForce on Practice Guidelines . American College of
Cardiology and American Heart Association; 2010.
Accessed September 23, 2023. https://www.acc.org/
Guidelines/About-Guidelines-and-Clinical-Documents/Methodology .https://professional.heart.org/-/media/
phd-ﬁles/guidelines-and-statements/methodology_
manual_and_policies_ucm_319826.pdf
5.Halperin JL, Levine GN, Al-Khatib SM, et al. Further
evolution of the ACC/AHA clinical practice guideline
recommendation classi ﬁcation system: a report of the
American College of Cardiology/American Heart As-sociation Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2016;67:1572 –1574 .
6.Arnett DK, Goodman RA, Halperin JL, et al. AHA/
ACC/HHS strategies to enhance application of clinical
practice guidelines in patients with cardiovascular
disease and comorbid conditions: from the AmericanHeart Association, American College of Cardiology,and U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;64:1851 –1856 .
7.Levine GN, O ’Gara PT, Beckman JA, et al. Recent in-
novations, modi ﬁcations, and evolution of ACC/AHA
clinical practice guidelines: an update for our constitu-encies: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Prac-
tice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;73:1990 –1998 .
1.1. Methodology and Evidence Review
1.Animal Studies —Standard —PubMed . In: CADTH
Search Filters Database . Ottawa: CADTH; 2022.
Accessed September 14, 2022. https://search ﬁlters.
cadth.ca/link/54
2.Guidelines —Broad—PubMed . In:CADTH Search Filters
Database . Ottawa: CADTH; 2022. Accessed September
14, 2022. https://search ﬁlters.cadth.ca/link/75
3.Guidelines —Standard —PubMed .I n : CADTH Search
Filters Database .O t t a w a :C A D T H ;2 0 2 2 .A c c e s s e d
September 14, 2022. https://search ﬁlters.cadth.ca/link/77
4.RCT / CCT —PubMed. In: CADTH Search Filters
Database . Ottawa: CADTH; 2022. Accessed September
14, 2022. https://search ﬁlters.cadth.ca/link/108
5.SR / MA / HTA / ITC —PubMed. In: CADTH Search
Filters Database . Ottawa: CADTH; 2022. AccessedSeptember 14, 2022. https://search ﬁlters.cadth.ca/
link/99
6.Donahue KE, Gartlehner G, Schulman ER, et al. Drug
Therapy for Early Rheumatoid Arthritis: A Systematic
Review Update [Internet]. (Comparative Effectiveness
Review, No. 211.) Appendix A, Search Strings. Agencyfor Healthcare Research and Quality (US). 2018.Accessed September 14, 2022. https://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/books/NBK524945/
1.4. Scope of the Guideline
1.Gersh BJ, Maron BJ, Bonow RO, et al. 2011 ACCF/
AHA guideline for the diagnosis and treatment of hy-pertrophic cardiomyopathy: a report of the AmericanCollege of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart As-sociation Task Force on Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2011;58:e212 –e260 .
2.Elliott PM, Anastasakis A, Borger MA, et al. 2014
ESC guidelines on diagnosis and management of hy-pertrophic cardiomyopathy: the Task Force for theDiagnosis and Management of Hypertrophic Cardio-myopathy of the European Society of Cardiology(ESC). Eur Heart J . 2014;35:2733 –2779 .
3.Ommen SR, Mital S, Burke MA, et al. 2020 AHA/ACC
guideline for the diagnosis and treatment of patientswith hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a report of theAmerican College of Cardiology/American Heart As-sociation Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guide-lines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2020;76:e159 –e240 .
4.January CT, Wann LS, Alpert JS, et al. 2014 AHA/
ACC/HRS guideline for the management of patientswith atrial ﬁbrillation: a report of the American College
of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Forceon Practice Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;64:e1 –e76.
5.January CT, Wann LS, Calkins H, et al. 2019 AHA/
ACC/HRS focused update of the 2014 AHA/ACC/HRSguideline for the management of patients with atrialﬁbrillation: a report of the American College of Car-
diology/American Heart Association Task Force onClinical Practice Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm So-ciety. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;74:104 –132.
6.Joglar JA, Chung MK, et al. 2023 ACC/AHA/ACCP/
HRS guideline for the diagnosis and management ofatrial ﬁbrillation: a report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Commit-tee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol
.
2024;83:109 –279.
7.Yancy CW, Jessup M, Bozkurt B, et al. 2013 ACCF/
AHA guideline for the management of heart failure: areport of the American College of Cardiology Founda-tion/American Heart Association Task Force on PracticeGuidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2013;62:e147 –e239 .
8.Yancy CW, Jessup M, Bozkurt B, et al. 2016 ACC/
AHA/HFSA focused update on new pharmacological
therapy for heart failure: an update of the 2013 ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of heart failure: areport of the American College of Cardiology/Amer-ican Heart Association Task Force on Clinical PracticeGuidelines and the Heart Failure Society of America.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2016;68:1476 –1488 .
9.Heidenreich PA, Bozkurt B, Aguilar D, et al. 2022
AHA/ACC/HFSA guideline for the management ofheart failure: a report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Commit-tee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2022;79:e263 –e421 .
10.Arnett DK, Blumenthal RS, Albert MA, et al. 2019
ACC/AHA guideline on the primary prevention of car-
diovascular disease: a report of the American College
of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Forceon Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2019;74:e177 –e232 .
11.Jensen MD, Ryan DH, Apovian CM, et al. 2013 AHA/
ACC/TOS guideline for the management of overweightand obesity in adults: a report of the American Collegeof Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force
on Practice Guidelines and The Obesity Society. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2014;63:2985 –3023 .
12.Epstein AE, Dimarco JP, Ellenbogen KA, et al. 2012
ACCF/AHA/HRS focused update incorporated into theACCF/AHA/HRS 2008 guidelines for device-basedtherapy of cardiac rhythm abnormalities: A report ofthe American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice
Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2013;61:e6 –e75.
13.Al-Khatib SM, Stevenson WG, Ackerman MJ, et al.
2017 AHA/ACC/HRS guideline for management of pa-tients with ventricular arrhythmias and the preventionof sudden cardiac death: a report of the AmericanCollege of Cardiology/American Heart AssociationTask Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines and the
Heart Rhythm Society. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2018;72:e91 –
e220 .
14.Kusumoto FM, Schoenfeld MH, Barrett C, et al.
2018 ACC/AHA/HRS guideline on the evaluation andmanagement of patients with bradycardia and car-diac conduction delay: a report of the AmericanCollege of Cardiology/American Heart AssociationTask Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines and the
Heart Rhythm Society. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;74:
e51–e156 .
15.Mosca L, Benjamin EJ, Berra K, et al. Effectiveness-
based guidelines for the prevention of cardiovasculardisease in women —2011 update: a guideline from the
American Heart Association. Circulation . 2011;123:
1243 –1262 .
16.Smith SC Jr, Benjamin EJ, Bonow RO, et al. AHA/
ACCF secondary prevention and risk reduction therapyfor patients with coronary and other atherosclerotic
vascular disease: 2011 update: a guideline from the
American Heart Association and American College ofCardiology Foundation. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2011;58:
2432 –2446 .
17.Greenland P, Alpert JS, Beller GA, et al.
2010 ACCF/AHA guideline for assessment of
cardiovascular risk in asymptomatic adults: a reportof the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force onPractice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2010;56:e50 –
e103 .
18.Jones DW, Hall JE. Seventh report of the Joint
National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evalu-
ation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure and evi-
dence from new hypertension trials. Hypertension .
2004;43:1 –3.Ommen et al J A C CV O L .8 3 ,N O .2 3 ,2 0 2 4
2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –24052382

19.Nishimura RA, O ’Gara PT, Bavaria JE, et al. 2019
AATS/ACC/ASE/SCAI/STS expert consensus systems ofcare document: a proposal to optimize care for pa-tients with valvular heart disease: a joint report of the
American Association for Thoracic Surgery, American
College of Cardiology, American Society of Echocar-diography, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography andInterventions, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2019;73:2609 –2635 .
2.1. Prevalence
1.Burns J, Jean-Pierre P. Disparities in the diagnosis of
hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy: a narrativereview of current literature. Cardiol Res Pract .
2018;2018:3750879 .
2.Semsarian C, Ingles J, Maron MS, et al. New per-
spectives on the prevalence of hypertrophic cardio-myopathy. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2015;65:1249 –1254 .
3.Maron MS, Hellawell JL, Lucove JC, et al. Occur-
rence of clinically diagnosed hypertrophic cardiomy-
opathy in the United States. Am J Cardiol . 2016;117:
1651 –1654 .
4.Eberly LA, Day SM, Ashley EA, et al. Association of
race with disease expression and clinical outcomesamong patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.JAMA Cardiol . 2020;5:83 –91.
2.2. Nomenclature and Differential Diagnosis
1.Maron BJ, Desai MY, Nishimura RA, et al. Diagnosis
and evaluation of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: JACCstate-of-the-art review. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2022;79:
372–389.
2.Maron BJ, Ommen SR, Semsarian C, et al. Hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathy: present and future, with
translation into contemporary cardiovascular medi-cine. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;64:83 –99.
3.Maron BJ. Clinical course and management of hy-
pertrophic cardiomyopathy. N Engl J Med . 2018;379:
655–668.
4.Maron BJ, Rowin EJ, Casey SA, et al. How hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathy became a contemporary
treatable genetic disease with low mortality: shapedby 50 years of clinical research and practice. JAMA
Cardiol . 2016;1:98 –105.
5.Maron BJ, Rowin EJ, Casey SA, et al. Hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy in adulthood associated with lowcardiovascular mortality with contemporary manage-
ment strategies. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2015;65:1915 –1928 .
6.Keegan MT, Sinak LJ, Nichols DA, et al. Dynamic left
ventricular out ﬂow tract obstruction in acute coronary
syndromes. Mayo Clin Proc . 2000;75:216
–217.
7.Sherrid MV, Riedy K, Rosenzweig B, et al. Distinctive
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy anatomy and obstruc-tive physiology in patients admitted with TakotsuboSyndrome. Am J Cardiol . 2020;125:1700 –1709 .
2.3. De ﬁnition, Clinical Diagnosis, and Phenotype
1.Geske JB, Ommen SR, Gersh BJ. Hypertrophic car-
diomyopathy: clinical update. J Am Coll Cardiol HF .
2018;6:364 –375.
2.Marian AJ, Braunwald E. Hypertrophic cardiomyop-
athy: genetics, pathogenesis, clinical manifestations,
diagnosis, and therapy. Circ Res . 2017;121:749 –770.
3.Maron BJ, Ommen SR, Semsarian C, et al. Hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathy: present and future, withtranslation into contemporary cardiovascular medi-
cine. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;64:83 –99.
4.Maron BJ. Clinical course and management of hy-
pertrophic cardiomyopathy. N Engl J Med . 2018;379:
655–668.
2.4. Etiology
1.Burke MA, Cook SA, Seidman JG, et al. Clinical and
mechanistic insights into the genetics of cardiomyop-
athy. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2016;68:2871 –2886 .
2.Ingles J, Burns C, Bagnall RD, et al. Nonfamilial
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: prevalence, natural
history, and clinical implications. Circ Cardiovasc Genet .
2017;10:e001620 .
3.Tadros R, Francis C, Xu X, et al. Shared genetic
pathways contribute to risk of hypertrophic anddilated cardiomyopathies with opposite directions ofeffect. Nat Genet . 2021;53:128 –134.
4.Ho CY, Day SM, Ashley EA, et al. Genotype and
lifetime burden of disease in hypertrophic cardiomy-opathy: insights from the Sarcomeric Human Cardio-myopathy Registry (SHaRE). Circulation . 2018;138:
1387 –1398 .
2.5. Natural History and Clinical Course
1.Ho CY, Day SM, Ashley EA, et al. Genotype and
lifetime burden of disease in hypertrophic cardiomy-opathy: insights from the Sarcomeric Human Cardio-myopathy Registry (SHaRE). Circulation . 2018;138:
1387 –1398 .
2.Maron BJ, Rowin EJ, Casey SA, et al. How hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathy became a contemporarytreatable genetic disease with low mortality: shapedby 50 years of clinical research and practice. JAMA
Cardiol
. 2016;1:98 –105.
3.Maron BJ. Clinical course and management of hy-
pertrophic cardiomyopathy. N Engl J Med . 2018;379:
655–668.
4.Lopes LR, Losi MA, Sheikh N, et al. Association be-
tween common cardiovascular risk factors and clinical
phenotype in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyop-athy from the European Society of Cardiology (ESC)EurObservational Research Programme (EORP) Car-diomyopathy/Myocarditis Registry. Eur Heart J Qual
Care Clin Outcomes . 2022;9:42 –53.
3.1. Left Ventricular Out ﬂow Tract Obstruction
1.Maron MS, Olivotto I, Zenovich AG, et al. Hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathy is predominantly a disease ofleft ventricular out ﬂow tract obstruction. Circulation .
2006;114:2232 –2239 .
2.Geske JB, Sorajja P, Ommen SR, et al. Variability of
left ventricular out ﬂow tract gradient during cardiac
catheterization in patients with hypertrophic cardio-myopathy. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv . 2011;4:704 –709.
3.Adams JC, Bois JP, Masaki M, et al. Postprandial
hemodynamics in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.Echocardiography . 2015;32:1614 –1620 .
4.Jain R, Osranek M, Jan MF, et al. Marked
respiratory-related ﬂuctuations in left ventricular
outﬂow tract gradients in hypertrophic obstructive
cardiomyopathy: an observational study. Eur Heart J
Cardiovasc Imaging . 2018;19:1126 –1133.
5.Ayoub C, Geske JB, Larsen CM, et al. Comparison of
Valsalva maneuver, amyl nitrite, and exercise echo-cardiography to demonstrate latent left ventricularoutﬂow obstruction in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Am J Cardiol . 2017;120:2265 –2271 .
6.Nistri S, Olivotto I, Maron MS, et al. Timing and
signiﬁcance of exercise-induced left ventricular
outﬂow tract pressure gradients in hypertrophic car-
diomyopathy. Am J Cardiol . 2010;106:1301 –1306 .
7.Reant P, Dufour M, Peyrou J, et al. Upright treadmill
vs. semi-supine bicycle exercise echocardiography toprovoke obstruction in symptomatic hypertrophiccardiomyopathy: a pilot study. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc
Imaging . 2018;19:31
–38.
8.Joshi S, Patel UK, Yao S-S, et al. Standing and ex-
ercise Doppler echocardiography in obstructive hy-pertrophic cardiomyopathy: the range of gradients
with upright activity. J Am Soc Echocardiogr . 2011;24:
75–82.
9.Feiner E, Arabadjian M, Winson G, et al. Post-
prandial upright exercise echocardiography in hyper-trophic cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2013;61:
2487 –2488 .
10.Pellikka PA, Oh JK, Bailey KR, et al. Dynamic
intraventricular obstruction during dobutamine stress
echocardiography. A new observation. Circulation .
1992;86:1429 –1432 .
11.Elesber A, Nishimura RA, Rihal CS, et al. Utility of
isoproterenol to provoke out ﬂow tract gradients in
patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Am J
Cardiol . 2008;101:516 –520.
3.2. Diastolic Dysfunction
1.Paulus WJ, Lorell BH, Craig WE, et al. Comparison of
the effects of nitroprusside and nifedipine on diastolic
properties in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyop-athy: altered left ventricular loading or improvedmuscle inactivation? J Am Coll Cardiol . 1983;2:879 –
886.
2.Soullier C, Obert P, Doucende G, et al. Exercise
response in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: blunted left
ventricular deformational and twisting reserve with
altered systolic-diastolic coupling. Circ Cardiovasc Im-
aging . 2012;5:324 –332.
3.Villemain O, Correia M, Mousseaux E, et al.
Myocardial stiffness evaluation using noninvasiveshear wave imaging in healthy and hypertrophic car-diomyopathic adults. J Am Coll Cardiol Img . 2019;12:
1135 –1145.
4.Ho CY, Carlsen C, Thune JJ, et al. Echocardiographic
strain imaging to assess early and late consequences ofsarcomere mutations in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.Circ Cardiovasc Genet . 2009;2:314 –321.
5.Dass S, Cochlin LE, Suttie JJ, et al. Exacerbation of
cardiac energetic impairment during exercise inhypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a potential mechanismfor diastolic dysfunction. Eur Heart J . 2015;36:1547 –
1554 .
6.Desai MY, Bhonsale A, Patel P, et al. Exercise
echocardiography in asymptomatic HCM: exercise ca-pacity, and not LV out ﬂow tract gradient predicts
long-term outcomes. J Am Coll Cardiol Img . 2014;7:
26–36.
3.3. Mitral Regurgitation
1.Maron MS, Olivotto I, Harrigan C, et al. Mitral valve
abnormalities identi ﬁed by cardiovascular magnetic
resonance represent a primary phenotypic expressionJACC VOL. 83, NO. 23, 2024 Ommen et al
JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –2405 2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline2383

of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Circulation . 2011;124:
40–47.
2.Groarke JD, Galazka PZ, Cirino AL, et al. Intrinsic
mitral valve alterations in hypertrophic cardiomyopa-thy sarcomere mutation carriers. Eur Heart J Car-
diovasc Imaging . 2018;19:1109 –1116.
3.Sherrid MV, Balaram S, Kim B, et al. The mitral valve
in obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a test incontext. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2016;67:1846 –1858 .
4.Hang D, Schaff HV, Nishimura RA, et al. Accuracy of
jet direction on Doppler echocardiography in identi-fying the etiology of mitral regurgitation in obstructivehypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Am Soc Echocardiogr .
2019;32:333 –340.
5.Hodges K, Rivas CG, Aguilera J, et al. Surgical
management of left ventricular out ﬂow tract
obstruction in a specialized hypertrophic obstructivecardiomyopathy center. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg .
2019;157:2289 –2299 .
6.Hong JH, Schaff HV, Nishimura RA, et al. Mitral
regurgitation in patients with hypertrophic obstructive
cardiomyopathy: implications for concomitant valve
procedures. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2016;68:1497 –1504 .
3.4. Myocardial Ischemia
1.Cannon RO III, Rosing DR, Maron BJ, et al. Myocar-
dial ischemia in patients with hypertrophic cardiomy-opathy: contribution of inadequate vasodilator reserve
and elevated left ventricular ﬁlling pressures. Circula-
tion. 1985;71:234 –243.
2.Maron BJ, Wolfson JK, Epstein SE, et al. Intramural
(“small vessel ”) coronary artery disease in hypertro-
phic cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll Cardiol . 1986;8:545 –
557.
3.Karamitsos TD, Dass S, Suttie J, et al. Blunted
myocardial oxygenation response during vasodilator
stress in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
J Am Coll Cardiol . 2013;61:1169 –1176.
4.Raphael CE, Cooper R, Parker KH, et al. Mechanisms
of myocardial ischemia in hypertrophic cardiomyopa-thy: insights from wave intensity analysis and mag-netic resonance. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2016;68:1651 –
1660 .
5.Sorajja P, Ommen SR, Nishimura RA, et al. Adverse
prognosis of patients with hypertrophic cardiomyop-
athy who have epicardial coronary artery disease. Cir-
culation . 2003;108:2342 –2348 .
6.Rowin EJ, Maron BJ, Haas TS, et al. Hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy with left ventricular apical aneurysm:implications for risk strati ﬁcation and management.
J Am Coll Cardiol . 2017;69:761 –773.
7.Binder J, Attenhofer Jost CH, Klarich KW, et al.
Apical hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: prevalence and
correlates of apical outpouching. J Am Soc Echo-
cardiogr . 2011;24:775 –781.
8.Hostiuc S, Rusu MC, Hostiuc M, et al. Cardiovascular
consequences of myocardial bridging: a meta-analysisand meta-regression. Sci Rep . 2017;7:14644 .
9.Sharzehee M, Chang Y, Song JP, et al. Hemody-
namic effects of myocardial bridging in patients with
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Am J Physiol Heart Circ
Physiol . 2019;317:H1282 –H1291 .
10.Tian T, Wang YL, Wang JZ, et al. Myocardial
bridging as a common phenotype of hypertrophiccardiomyopathy has no effect on prognosis. Am J Med
Sci. 2014;347:429 –433.
11.Yetman AT, McCrindle BW, MacDonald C, et al.
Myocardial bridging in children with hypertrophiccardiomyopathy –a risk factor for sudden death. N Engl
J Med . 1998;339:1201 –1209 .
12.Zhai SS, Fan CM, An SY, et al. Clinical outcomes of
myocardial bridging versus no myocardial bridging in
patients with apical hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.Cardiology . 2018;139:161 –168.
3.5. Autonomic Dysfunction
1.Patel V, Critoph CH, Finlay MC, et al. Heart rate
recovery in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopa-thy. Am J Cardiol . 2014;113:1011 –1017 .
2.Frenneaux MP, Counihan PJ, Caforio AL, et al.
Abnormal blood pressure response during exercise in
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Circulation . 1990;82:
1995 –2002 .
3.Sadoul N, Prasad K, Elliott PM, et al. Prospective
prognostic assessment of blood pressure responseduring exercise in patients with hypertrophic cardio-myopathy. Circulation . 1997;96:2987 –2991 .
4.Olivotto I, Maron BJ, Montereggi A, et al. Prog-
nostic value of systemic blood pressure response
during exercise in a community-based patient popu-lation with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 1999;33:2044 –2051 .
4. Shared Decision-Making
1.Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. Strategy 6I:
Shared Decisionmaking. The CAHPS Ambulatory CareImprovement Guide: Practical Strategies for Improving Pa-tient Experience . 2017. Accessed April 29, 2020. https://
www.ahrq.gov/cahps/quality -improvement/improvement-
guide/6-strategies-for-improving/communication/strat-
egy6i-shared-decisionmaking.html
2.Green ﬁeld S, Kaplan SH, Ware JE Jr, et al. Patients ’
participation in medical care: effects on blood sugarcontrol and quality of life in diabetes. J Gen Intern
Med. 1988;3:448 –457.
3.Green ﬁeld S, Kaplan S, Ware JE Jr. Expanding pa-
tient involvement in care. Effects on patient outcomes.Ann Intern Med . 1985;102:520 –528.
4.Kaplan SH, Green ﬁeld S, Ware JE Jr. Assessing the
effects of physician-patient interactions on the out-
comes of chronic disease. Med Care . 1989;27:S110 –127.
5.Guadagnoli E, Ward P. Patient participation in de-
cision-making. Soc Sci Med . 1998;47:329 –339.
6.Legare F, Adekpedjou R, Stacey D, et al. In-
terventions for increasing the use of shared decisionmaking by healthcare professionals. Cochrane Data-
base Syst Rev . 2018;7:CD006732 .
5. Multidisciplinary HCM Centers
1.Kim LK, Swaminathan RV, Looser P, et al. Hospital
volume outcomes after septal myectomy and alcohol
septal ablation for treatment of obstructive
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: US nationwideinpatient database, 2003-2011. JAMA Cardiol . 2016;1:
324–332.
2.Panaich SS, Badheka AO, Chothani A, et al. Results
of ventricular septal myectomy and hypertrophic car-diomyopathy (from Nationwide Inpatient Sample[1998-2010]). Am J Cardiol . 2014;114:1390 –1395 .3.Sorajja P, Ommen SR, Holmes DR Jr, et al. Survival
after alcohol septal ablation for obstructive hypertro-phic cardiomyopathy. Circulation . 2012;126:2374 –
2380 .
4.Maron BJ, Nishimura RA, Maron MS. Shared
decision-making in HCM. Nat Rev Cardiol . 2017;14:125 –
126
.
5.Chambers JB, Prendergast B, Iung B, et al. Stan-
dards de ﬁning a “heart valve centre ”: ESC Working
Group on Valvular Heart Disease and European Asso-ciation for Cardiothoracic Surgery Viewpoint. Eur Heart
J. 2017;38:2177 –2183 .
6.Semsarian C, Ingles J, Maron MS, et al. New per-
spectives on the prevalence of hypertrophic cardio-myopathy. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2015;65:1249 –1254 .
7.Maron BJ, Ommen SR, Semsarian C, et al. Hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathy: present and future, withtranslation into contemporary cardiovascular medi-cine. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;64:83 –99.
8.Ommen SR, Maron BJ, Olivotto I, et al. Long-term
effects of surgical septal myectomy on survival inpatients with obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopa-thy. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2005;46:470 –476.
9.Desai MY, Bhonsale A, Smedira NG, et al. Predictors
of long-term outcomes in symptomatic hypertrophicobstructive cardiomyopathy patients undergoing sur-gical relief of left ventricular out ﬂow tract obstruction.
Circulation . 2013;128:209 –216.
10.Lim K-K, Maron BJ, Knight BP. Successful catheter
ablation of hemodynamically unstable monomorphicventricular tachycardia in a patient with hypertrophiccardiomyopathy and apical aneurysm. J Cardiovasc
Electrophysiol . 2009;20:445 –447.
11.Dukkipati SR, d ’Avila A, Soejima K, et al. Long-term
outcomes of combined epicardial and endocardialablation of monomorphic ventricular tachycardiarelated to hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Circ Arrhythm
Electrophysiol . 2011;4:185 –194.
12.Rowin EJ, Maron BJ, Abt P, et al. Impact of
advanced therapies for improving survival to hearttransplant in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyop-
athy. Am J Cardiol . 2018;121:986 –996.
13.Pasqualucci D, Fornaro A, Castelli G, et al. Clinical
spectrum, therapeutic options, and outcome ofadvanced heart failure in hypertrophic cardiomyopa-
thy. Circ Heart Fail . 2015;8:1014 –1021 .
14.Garmany R, Bos JM, Ommen SR, et al. Clinical
course of patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathyaway from tertiary referral care. ESC Heart Fail .
2023;10:1919 –1927 .
15.Nishimura RA, O ’
Gara PT, Bavaria JE, et al. 2019
AATS/ACC/ASE/SCAI/STS expert consensus systems ofcare document: a proposal to optimize care for pa-
tients with valvular heart disease: a joint report of the
American Association for Thoracic Surgery, AmericanCollege of Cardiology, American Society of Echocar-diography, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography andInterventions, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2019;73:2609 –2635 .
16.Polanco AR, D ’Angelo A, Shea N, et al. Impact of
septal myectomy volume on mitral-valve replacementrate in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy patients. Cardi-
ology . 2020;145:161 –167.
17.Holst KA, Hanson KT, Ommen SR, et al. Septal
myectomy in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: nationalOmmen et al J A C CV O L .8 3 ,N O .2 3 ,2 0 2 4
2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –24052384

outcomes of concomitant mitral surgery. Mayo Clin
Proc. 2019;94:66 –73.
6.1. Clinical Diagnosis
1.Maron BJ, Maron MS, Semsarian C. Genetics of hy-
pertrophic cardiomyopathy after 20 years: clinical
perspectives. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2012;60:705 –715.
2.Ingles J, Yeates L, Semsarian C. The emerging role
of the cardiac genetic counselor. Heart Rhythm .
2011;8:1958 –1962 .
3.Ahmad F, McNally EM, Ackerman MJ, et al. Estab-
lishment of specialized clinical cardiovascular geneticsprograms: recognizing the need and meeting stan-dards: a scienti ﬁc statement from the American Heart
Association. Circ Genom Precis Med . 2019;12:
e000054 .
4.van Velzen HG, Schinkel AFL, Baart SJ, et al. Out-
comes of contemporary family screening in hypertro-
phic cardiomyopathy. Circ Genom Precis Med . 2018;11:
e001896 .
5.Ranthe MF, Carstensen L, Oyen N, et al. Risk of
cardiomyopathy in younger persons with a family his-tory of death from cardiomyopathy: a nationwidefamily study in a cohort of 3.9 million persons. Circu-
lation . 2015;132:1013 –1019 .
6.Lafreniere-Roula M, Bolkier Y, Zahavich L, et al.
Family screening for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: is
it time to change practice guidelines? Eur Heart J .
2019;40:3672 –3681 .
6.2. Echocardiography
1.Adabag AS, Kuskowski MA, Maron BJ. Determinants
for clinical diagnosis of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.Am J Cardiol . 2006;98:1507 –1511.
2.Afonso LC, Bernal J, Bax JJ, et al. Echocardiography
in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: the role of conven-
tional and emerging technologies. J Am Coll Cardiol
Img. 2008;1:787 –800.
3.Klues HG, Schiffers A, Maron BJ. Phenotypic spec-
trum and patterns of left ventricular hypertrophy inhypertrophic cardiomyopathy: morphologic observa-tions and signi ﬁcance as assessed by two-dimensional
echocardiography in 600 patients. J Am Coll Cardiol .
1995;26:1699 –1708 .
4.Wigle ED, Sasson Z, Henderson MA, et al. Hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathy. The importance of the site
and the extent of hypertrophy. A review. Prog Car-
diovasc Dis . 1985;28:1 –
83.
5.Shapiro LM, McKenna WJ. Distribution of left ven-
tricular hypertrophy in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: atwo-dimensional echocardiographic study. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 1983;2:437 –444.
6.Nagueh SF, Bierig SM, Budoff MJ, et al. American
Society of Echocardiography clinical recommendationsfor multimodality cardiovascular imaging of patientswith hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Am Soc Echo-
cardiogr . 2011;24:473 –498.
7.Melacini P, Basso C, Angelini A, et al. Clinicopatho-
logical pro ﬁles of progressive heart failure in hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathy. Eur Heart J . 2010;31:2111 –
2123 .
8.Thaman R, Gimeno JR, Murphy RT, et al. Prevalence
and clinical signi ﬁcance of systolic impairment in hy-
pertrophic cardiomyopathy. Heart . 2005;91:920 –925.9.Harris KM, Spirito P, Maron MS, et al. Prevalence,
clinical pro ﬁle, and signi ﬁcance of left ventricular
remodeling in the end-stage phase of hypertrophiccardiomyopathy. Circulation . 2006;114:216 –225.
10.Olivotto I, Cecchi F, Poggesi C, et al. Patterns of
disease progression in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy:
an individualized approach to clinical staging. Circ
Heart Fail . 2012;5:535 –546.
11.Todiere G, Aquaro GD, Piaggi P, et al. Progression
of myocardial ﬁbrosis assessed with cardiac magnetic
resonance in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2012;60:922 –929.
12.Norrish G, Ding T, Field E, et al. A validation study
of the European Society of Cardiology guidelines for
risk strati ﬁcation of sudden cardiac death in childhood
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Europace . 2019;21:
1559 –1565 .
13.Balaji S, DiLorenzo MP, Fish FA, et al. Risk factors
for lethal arrhythmic events in children and adoles-cents with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and animplantable de ﬁbrillator: an international multicenter
study. Heart Rhythm . 2019;16:1462 –1467 .
14.Douglas PS, Garcia MJ, Haines DE, et al. ACCF/ASE/
AHA/ASNC/HFSA/HRS/SCAI/SCCM/SCCT/SCMR 2011appropriate use criteria for echocardiography: a reportof the American College of Cardiology FoundationAppropriate Use Criteria Task Force, American Societyof Echocardiography, American Heart Association,American Society of Nuclear Cardiology, Heart Failure
Society of America, Heart Rhythm Society, Society for
Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, Societyof Critical Care Medicine, Society of CardiovascularComputed Tomography, and Society for Cardiovascu-lar Magnetic Resonance. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2011;57:
1126 –1166 .
15.Maron MS, Olivotto I, Betocchi S, et al. Effect of
left ventricular out ﬂow tract obstruction on clinical
outcome in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. N Engl J
Med. 2003;348:295 –303.
16.Woo A, Williams WG, Choi R, et al. Clinical and
echocardiographic determinants of long-term survivalafter surgical myectomy in obstructive hypertrophiccardiomyopathy. Circulation . 2005;111:2033 –2041 .
17.Geske JB, Sorajja P, Nishimura RA, et al. Evaluation
of left ventricular ﬁlling pressures by Doppler echo-
cardiography in patients with hypertrophic cardiomy-
opathy: correlation with direct left atrial pressuremeasurement at cardiac catheterization. Circulation .
2007;116:2702 –2708 .
18.Kumar S, Van Ness G, Bender A, et al. Standardized
goal-directed Valsalva maneuver for assessment ofinducible left ventricular out ﬂow tract obstruction in
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Am Soc Echocardiogr .
2018;31:791 –798.
19.Marwick TH, Nakatani S, Haluska B, et al. Provo-
cation of latent left ventricular out ﬂow tract gradients
with amyl nitrite and exercise in hypertrophic cardio-myopathy. Am J Cardiol . 1995;75:805 –809.
20.Joshi S, Patel UK, Yao S-S, et al. Standing and
exercise Doppler echocardiography in obstructive hy-
pertrophic cardiomyopathy: the range of gradients
with upright activity. J Am Soc Echocardiogr . 2011;24:
75–82.
21.Maron MS, Olivotto I, Zenovich AG, et al. Hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathy is predominantly a disease ofleft ventricular out ﬂow tract obstruction. Circulation .
2006;114:2232 –2239 .
22.Ayoub C, Geske JB, Larsen CM, et al. Comparison of
Valsalva maneuver, amyl nitrite, and exercise echo-cardiography to demonstrate latent left ventricularoutﬂow obstruction in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Am J Cardiol . 2017;120:2265 –2271 .
23.
Jensen MK, Havndrup O, Pecini R, et al. Compari-
son of Valsalva manoeuvre and exercise in echocar-diographic evaluation of left ventricular out ﬂow tract
obstruction in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Eur J
Echocardiogr . 2010;11:763 –769.
24.Reant P, Dufour M, Peyrou J, et al. Upright
treadmill vs. semi-supine bicycle exercise echocardi-ography to provoke obstruction in symptomatic hy-pertrophic cardiomyopathy: a pilot study. Eur Heart J
Cardiovasc Imaging . 2018;19:31 –38.
25.Shah JS, Esteban MTT, Thaman R, et al. Prevalence
of exercise-induced left ventricular out ﬂow tract
obstruction in symptomatic patients with non-obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Heart .
2008;94:1288 –1294 .
26.Grigg LE, Wigle ED, Williams WG, et al. Trans-
esophageal Doppler echocardiography in obstructivehypertrophic cardiomyopathy: clari ﬁcation of patho-
physiology and importance in intraoperative decision
making. J Am Coll Cardiol . 1992;20:42 –52.
27.Marwick TH, Stewart WJ, Lever HM, et al. Bene ﬁts
of intraoperative echocardiography in the surgicalmanagement of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 1992;20:1066 –1072 .
28.Nampiaparampil RG, Swistel DG, Schlame M, et al.
Intraoperative two- and three-dimensional trans-esophageal echocardiography in combined myectomy-mitral operations for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
J Am Soc Echocardiogr . 2018;31:275 –288.
29.Ommen SR, Park SH, Click RL, et al. Impact of
intraoperative transesophageal echocardiography inthe surgical management of hypertrophic cardiomy-
opathy. Am J Cardiol . 2002;90:1022 –1024 .
30.Faber L, Seggewiss H, Ziemssen P, et al. Intra-
procedural myocardial contrast echocardiography as aroutine procedure in percutaneous transluminal septal
myocardial ablation: detection of threatening
myocardial necrosis distant from the septal targetarea. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv . 1999;47:462 –466.
31.Faber L, Ziemssen P, Seggewiss H. Targeting
percutaneous transluminal septal ablation for hyper-
trophic obstructive cardiomyopathy by intraproceduralechocardiographic monitoring. J Am Soc Echocardiogr .
2000;13:1074 –1079 .
32.Nagueh SF, Zoghbi WA. Role of imaging in the
evaluation of patients at risk for sudden cardiac death:
genotype-phenotype intersection. J Am Coll Cardiol
Img. 2015;8:828 –845
.
33.Faber L, Seggewiss H, Welge D, et al. Echo-guided
percutaneous septal ablation for symptomatic hyper-
trophic obstructive cardiomyopathy: 7 years of expe-rience. Eur J Echocardiogr . 2004;5:347 –355.
34.Kuhn H, Gietzen FH, Schäfers M, et al. Changes in
the left ventricular out ﬂow tract after transcoronary
ablation of septal hypertrophy (TASH) for hypertrophicobstructive cardiomyopathy as assessed by trans-oesophageal echocardiography and by measuringJACC VOL. 83, NO. 23, 2024 Ommen et al
JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –2405 2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline2385

myocardial glucose utilization and perfusion. Eur Heart
J. 1999;20:1808 –1817.
35.Sorajja P, Valeti U, Nishimura RA, et al. Outcome of
alcohol septal ablation for obstructive hypertrophiccardiomyopathy. Circulation . 2008;118:131 –139.
36.Faber L, Seggewiss H, Gleichmann U. Percutaneous
transluminal septal myocardial ablation in hypertro-
phic obstructive cardiomyopathy: results with respect
to intraprocedural myocardial contrast echocardiog-raphy. Circulation . 1998;98:2415 –2421 .
37.Qin JX, Shiota T, Lever HM, et al. Outcome of pa-
tients with hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathyafter percutaneous transluminal septal myocardialablation and septal myectomy surgery. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2001;38:1994 –2000 .
38.Ommen SR, Maron BJ, Olivotto I, et al. Long-term
effects of surgical septal myectomy on survival in
patients with obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopa-
thy. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2005;46:470 –476.
39.Jensen MK, Havndrup O, Christiansen M, et al.
Penetrance of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in chil-dren and adolescents. Circulation . 2013;127:48 –54.
40.Lafreniere-Roula M, Bolkier Y, Zahavich L, et al.
Family screening for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: isit time to change practice guidelines? Eur Heart J .
2019;40:3672 –3681 .
41.Maurizi N, Michels M, Rowin EJ, et al. Clinical
course and signi ﬁcance of hypertrophic cardiomyopa-
thy without left ventricular hypertrophy. Circulation .
2019;139:830 –833.
42.Norrish G, Jager J, Field E, et al. Yield of clinical
screening for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in childﬁrst-degree relatives: evidence for a change in para-
digm. Circulation . 2019;140:184 –192.
43.Vermeer AMC, Clur S-AB, Blom NA, et al. Pene-
trance of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in children whoare mutation positive. J Pediatr . 2017;188:91 –95.
44.Thanigaraj S, Pérez JE. Apical hypertrophic car-
diomyopathy: echocardiographic diagnosis with theuse of intravenous contrast image enhancement. JA m
Soc Echocardiogr . 2000;13:146 –149.
45.
Porter TR, Mulvagh SL, Abdelmoneim SS, et al.
Clinical applications of ultrasonic enhancing agents inechocardiography: 2018 American Society of Echo-cardiography guidelines update. J Am Soc Echo-
cardiogr . 2018;31:241 –274.
46.Feiner E, Arabadjian M, Winson G, et al. Post-prandial
upright exercise echocardiography in hypertrophic car-diomyopathy. JA mC o l lC a r d i o l .2 0 1 3 ; 6 1 : 2 4 8 7 –2488 .
47.Faber L, Welge D, Fassbender D, et al. Percuta-
neous septal ablation for symptomatic hypertrophic
obstructive cardiomyopathy: managing the risk ofprocedure-related AV conduction disturbances. Int J
Cardiol . 2007;119:163 –167.
48.Liebregts M, Vriesendorp PA, Mahmoodi BK, et al.
A systematic review and meta-analysis of long-termoutcomes after septal reduction therapy in patientswith hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll Cardiol
HF. 2015;3:896 –905.
49.Charron P, Arad M, Arbustini E, et al. Genetic
counselling and testing in cardiomyopathies: a position
statement of the European Society of CardiologyWorking Group on Myocardial and Pericardial Diseases.Eur Heart J . 2010;31:2715 –2726 .50.Vigneault DM, Yang E, Jensen PJ, et al. Left ven-
tricular strain is abnormal in preclinical and overt hy-pertrophic cardiomyopathy: cardiac MR featuretracking. Radiology . 2019;290:640 –648.
51.Nagueh SF, McFalls J, Meyer D, et al. Tissue
Doppler imaging predicts the development of hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathy in subjects with subclinical
disease. Circulation . 2003;108:395 –398.
52.Ho CY, Sweitzer NK, McDonough B, et al. Assess-
ment of diastolic function with Doppler tissue imagingto predict genotype in preclinical hypertrophic car-diomyopathy. Circulation . 2002;105:2992 –2997 .
53.Hershberger RE, Cowan J, Morales A, et al. Prog-
ress with genetic cardiomyopathies: screening, coun-seling, and testing in dilated, hypertrophic, and
arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia/cardiomy-
opathy. Circ Heart Fail . 2009;2:253 –261.
6.3. CMR Imaging
1.Maron MS, Maron BJ, Harrigan C, et al. Hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy phenotype revisited after 50 yearswith cardiovascular magnetic resonance. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2009;54:220 –228.
2.Rickers C, Wilke NM, Jerosch-Herold M, et al. Utility
of cardiac magnetic resonance imaging in the diagnosis
of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Circulation .
2005;112:855 –861.
3.Moon JCC, Fisher NG, McKenna WJ, et al. Detection
of apical hypertrophic cardiomyopathy by cardiovas-
cular magnetic resonance in patients with non-diagnostic echocardiography. Heart . 2004;90:645 –
649.
4.Hindieh W, Weissler-Snir A, Hammer H, et al.
Discrepant measurements of maximal left ventricular
wall thickness between cardiac magnetic resonanceimaging and echocardiography in patients with hy-pertrophic cardiomyopathy. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging .
2017;10:e006309 .
5.Corona-Villalobos CP, Sorensen LL, Pozios I, et al.
Left ventricular wall thickness in patients with hyper-trophic cardiomyopathy: a comparison between car-
diac magnetic resonance imaging and
echocardiography. Int J Cardiovasc Imaging . 2016;32:
945 –954.
6.Bois JP, Geske JB, Foley TA, et al. Comparison of
maximal wall thickness in hypertrophic cardiomyopa-thy differs between magnetic resonance imaging andtransthoracic echocardiography. Am J Cardiol .
2017;119:643 –650.
7.Maron MS, Rowin EJ, Maron BJ. How to image hy-
pertrophic cardiomyopathy. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging .
2017;10:e005372 .
8.Rowin EJ, Maron BJ, Haas TS, et al. Hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy with left ventricular apical aneurysm:implications for risk strati ﬁcation and management.
J Am Coll Cardiol . 2017;69:761 –773.
9.Kebed KY, Al Adham RI, Bishu K, et al. Evaluation of
apical pouches in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy usingcardiac MRI. Int J Cardiovasc Imaging . 2014;30:591 –
597.
10.Maron MS, Lesser JR, Maron BJ. Management im-
plications of massive left ventricular hypertrophy in
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy signi ﬁcantly under-
estimated by echocardiography but identi ﬁed bycardiovascular magnetic resonance. Am J Cardiol .
2010;105:1842 –1843 .
11.Weng Z, Yao J, Chan RH, et al. Prognostic value of
LGE-CMR in HCM: a meta-analysis. J Am Coll Cardiol
Img. 2016;9:1392 –1402 .
12.Chan RH, Maron BJ, Olivotto I, et al. Prognostic
value of quantitative contrast-enhanced cardiovascu-
lar magnetic resonance for the evaluation of sudden
death risk in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopa-thy. Circulation . 2014;130:484 –495.
13.Mentias A, Raeisi-Giglou P, Smedira NG, et al. Late
gadolinium enhancement in patients with hypertrophiccardiomyopathy and preserved systolic function. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2018;72:857
–870.
14.Ismail TF, Jabbour A, Gulati A, et al. Role of late
gadolinium enhancement cardiovascular magnetic
resonance in the risk strati ﬁcation of hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy. Heart . 2014;100:1851 –1858 .
15.Harris KM, Spirito P, Maron MS, et al. Prevalence,
clinical pro ﬁle, and signi ﬁcance of left ventricular
remodeling in the end-stage phase of hypertrophiccardiomyopathy. Circulation . 2006;114:216 –225.
16.Patel P, Dhillon A, Popovic ZB, et al. Left ventric-
ular out ﬂow tract obstruction in hypertrophic cardio-
myopathy patients without severe septal hypertrophy:
implications of mitral valve and papillary muscle ab-
normalities assessed using cardiac magnetic resonanceand echocardiography. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging .
2015;8:e003132 .
17.Rowin EJ, Maron BJ, Chokshi A, et al. Clinical
spectrum and management implications of left ven-tricular out ﬂow obstruction with mild ventricular
septal thickness in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Am J
Cardiol . 2018;122:1409 –1420 .
18.Sherrid MV, Balaram S, Kim B, et al. The mitral
valve in obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: atest in context. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2016;67:1846 –
1858 .
19.Kwon DH, Setser RM, Thamilarasan M, et al.
Abnormal papillary muscle morphology is indepen-dently associated with increased left ventricularoutﬂow tract obstruction in hypertrophic cardiomy-
opathy. Heart . 2008;94:1295 –1301 .
20.Rowin EJ, Maron BJ, Lesser JR, et al. Papillary
muscle insertion directly into the anterior mitral lea ﬂet
in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, its identi ﬁcation and
cause of out ﬂow obstruction by cardiac magnetic
resonance imaging, and its surgical management. Am J
Cardiol . 2013;111:1677 –1679 .
21.Rubinshtein R, Glockner JF, Ommen SR, et al.
Characteristics and clinical signi ﬁcance of late gado-
linium enhancement by contrast-enhanced magnetic
resonance imaging in patients with hypertrophic car-diomyopathy. Circ Heart Fail . 2010;3:51 –58.
22.Todiere G, Aquaro GD, Piaggi P, et al. Progression
of myocardial ﬁbrosis assessed with cardiac magnetic
resonance in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2012;60:922 –929.
23.Douglas PS, Garcia MJ, Haines DE, et al. ACCF/ASE/
AHA/ASNC/HFSA/HRS/SCAI/SCCM/SCCT/SCMR 2011appropriate use criteria for echocardiography: a report
of the American College of Cardiology Foundation
Appropriate Use Criteria Task Force, American Societyof Echocardiography, American Heart Association,Ommen et al J A C CV O L .8 3 ,N O .2 3 ,2 0 2 4
2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –24052386

American Society of Nuclear Cardiology, Heart Failure
Society of America, Heart Rhythm Society, Society forCardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, Societyof Critical Care Medicine, Society of Cardiovascular
Computed Tomography, and Society for Cardiovascu-
lar Magnetic Resonance. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2011;57:
1126 –1166 .
6.4. Cardiac CT
1.Nagueh SF, Bierig SM, Budoff MJ, et al. American
Society of Echocardiography clinical recommendations
for multimodality cardiovascular imaging of patients
with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Am Soc Echo-
cardiogr . 2011;24:473 –498.
2.Langer C, Lutz M, Eden M, et al. Hypertrophic car-
diomyopathy in cardiac CT: a validation study on thedetection of intramyocardial ﬁbrosis in consecutive
patients. Int J Cardiovasc Imaging . 2014;30:659 –667.
3.Zhao L, Ma X, Feuchtner GM, et al. Quanti ﬁcation of
myocardial delayed enhancement and wall thickness inhypertrophic cardiomyopathy: multidetectorcomputed tomography versus magnetic resonanceimaging. Eur J Radiol . 2014;83:1778 –1785 .
6.5. Heart Rhythm Assessment
1.Maron BJ. The electrocardiogram as a diagnostic
tool for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: revisited. Ann
Noninvasive Electrocardiol . 2001;6:277 –279.
2.Panza JA, Maron BJ. Relation of electrocardio-
graphic abnormalities to evolving left ventricular hy-pertrophy in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy during
childhood. Am J Cardiol . 1989;63:1258 –1265 .
3.Zorzi A, Calore C, Vio R, et al. Accuracy of the ECG
for differential diagnosis between hypertrophic car-diomyopathy and athlete ’s heart: comparison between
the European Society of Cardiology (2010) and Inter-national (2017) criteria. Br J Sports Med . 2018;52:667 –
673.
4.Maron BJ, Savage DD, Wolfson JK, et al. Prognostic
signiﬁcance of 24 hour ambulatory electrocardio-
graphic monitoring in patients with hypertrophic car-diomyopathy: a prospective study. Am J Cardiol .
1981;48:252 –257.
5.Monserrat L, Elliott PM, Gimeno JR, et al. Non-
sustained ventricular tachycardia in hypertrophic car-
diomyopathy: an independent marker of sudden death
risk in young patients. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2003;42:873 –
879.
6.Adabag AS, Casey SA, Kuskowski MA, et al. Spec-
trum and prognostic signi ﬁcance of arrhythmias on
ambulatory Holter electrocardiogram in hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2005;45:697 –704.
7.Wilke I, Witzel K, Münch J, et al. High incidence of
de novo and subclinical atrial ﬁbrillation in patients
with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and cardiac rhythmmanagement device. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol .
2016;27:779 –784.
8.van Velzen HG, Theuns DAMJ, Yap S-C, et al. Inci-
dence of device-detected atrial ﬁbrillation and long-
term outcomes in patients with hypertrophic cardio-
myopathy. Am J Cardiol . 2017;119:100 –105.
9.Rowin EJ, Hausvater A, Link MS, et al. Clinical pro-
ﬁle and consequences of atrial ﬁbrillation inhypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Circulation . 2017;136:
2420 –2436 .
10.Rowin EJ, Orfanos A, Estes NAM, et al. Occurrence
and natural history of clinically silent episodes of atrialﬁbrillation in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Am J
Cardiol . 2017;119:1862 –1865 .
11.Siontis KC, Geske JB, Ong K, et al. Atrial ﬁbrillation
in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: prevalence, clinicalcorrelations, and mortality in a large high-risk popu-lation. J Am Heart Assoc . 2014;3:e001002 .
12.Carrick RT, Maron MS, Adler A, et al. Development
and validation of a clinical predictive model for iden-tifying hypertrophic cardiomyopathy patients at risk
for atrial ﬁbrillation: the HCM-AF Score. Circ Arrhythm
Electrophysiol . 2021;14:e009796 .
13.Finocchiaro G, Sheikh N, Biagini E, et al. The elec-
trocardiogram in the diagnosis and management of
patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Heart
Rhythm . 2020;17:142 –151.
14.Maron BJ, Udelson JE, Bonow RO, et al. Eligibility
and disquali ﬁcation recommendations for competitive
athletes with cardiovascular abnormalities: Task Force3: hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, arrhythmogenic rightventricular cardiomyopathy and other cardiomyopa-thies, and myocarditis: a scienti ﬁc statement from the
American Heart Association and American College of
Cardiology. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2015;66:2362 –2371 .
15.Wang W, Lian Z, Rowin EJ, et al. Prognostic im-
plications of nonsustained ventricular tachycardia in
high-risk patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol
. 2017;10:e004604 .
16.Weissler-Snir A, Chan RH, Adler A, et al. Usefulness
of 14-day Holter for detection of nonsustained ven-
tricular tachycardia in patients with hypertrophic car-diomyopathy. Am J Cardiol . 2016;118:1258 –1263 .
6.6. Angiography and Invasive Hemodynamic
Assessment
1.Geske JB, Sorajja P, Nishimura RA, et al. Evaluation
of left ventricular ﬁlling pressures by Doppler echo-
cardiography in patients with hypertrophic cardiomy-opathy: correlation with direct left atrial pressuremeasurement at cardiac catheterization. Circulation .
2007;116:2702 –2708 .
2.Geske JB, Sorajja P, Ommen SR, et al. Variability of
left ventricular out ﬂow tract gradient during cardiac
catheterization in patients with hypertrophic cardio-
myopathy. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv . 2011;4:704 –709.
3.Prasad M, Geske JB, Sorajja P, et al. Hemodynamic
changes in systolic and diastolic function during
isoproterenol challenge predicts symptomatic
response to myectomy in hypertrophic cardiomyopa-thy with labile obstruction. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv .
2016;88:962 –970.
4.Elesber A, Nishimura RA, Rihal CS, et al. Utility of
isoproterenol to provoke out ﬂow tract gradients in
patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Am J
Cardiol . 2008;101:516 –520.
5.Sorajja P, Ommen SR, Nishimura RA, et al. Adverse
prognosis of patients with hypertrophic cardiomyop-athy who have epicardial coronary artery disease. Cir-
culation . 2003;108:2342 –2348 .
6.Thalji NM, Suri RM, Daly RC, et al. Assessment of
coronary artery disease risk in 5463 patientsundergoing cardiac surgery: when is preoperative
coronary angiography necessary? J Thorac Cardiovasc
Surg. 2013;146:1055 –1063 .
6.7. Exercise Stress Testing
1.Joshi S, Patel UK, Yao S-S, et al. Standing and ex-
ercise Doppler echocardiography in obstructive hy-pertrophic cardiomyopathy: the range of gradients
with upright activity. J Am Soc Echocardiogr . 2011;24:
75–82.
2.Maron MS, Olivotto I, Zenovich AG, et al. Hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathy is predominantly a disease of
left ventricular out ﬂow tract obstruction. Circulation .
2006;114:2232 –
2239 .
3.Ayoub C, Geske JB, Larsen CM, et al. Comparison of
Valsalva maneuver, amyl nitrite, and exercise echo-
cardiography to demonstrate latent left ventricular
outﬂow obstruction in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Am J Cardiol . 2017;120:2265 –2271 .
4.Jensen MK, Havndrup O, Pecini R, et al. Comparison
of Valsalva manoeuvre and exercise in echocardio-
graphic evaluation of left ventricular out ﬂow tract
obstruction in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Eur J
Echocardiogr . 2010;11:763 –769.
5.Reant P, Dufour M, Peyrou J, et al. Upright treadmill
vs. semi-supine bicycle exercise echocardiography toprovoke obstruction in symptomatic hypertrophiccardiomyopathy: a pilot study. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc
Imaging . 2018;19:31 –38.
6.Shah JS, Esteban MTT, Thaman R, et al. Prevalence
of exercise-induced left ventricular out ﬂow tract
obstruction in symptomatic patients with non-obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Heart .
2008;94:1288 –1294 .
7.Coats CJ, Rantell K, Bartnik A, et al. Cardiopulmo-
nary exercise testing and prognosis in hypertrophiccardiomyopathy. Circ Heart Fail . 2015;8:1022 –1031 .
8.Magrì D, Re F, Limongelli G, et al. Heart failure
progression in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy —possible
insights from cardiopulmonary exercise testing. Circ J .
2016;80:2204 –2211.
9.Bayonas-Ruiz A, Muñoz-Franco FM, Ferrer V, et al.
Cardiopulmonary exercise test in patients with hyper-trophic cardiomyopathy: a systematic review andmeta-analysis. J Clin Med . 2021;10:2312 .
10.Conway J, Min S, Villa C, et al. The prevalence and
association of exercise test abnormalities with suddencardiac death and transplant-free survival in childhoodhypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Circulation . 2023;147:
718–727.
11.Ciampi Q, Olivotto I, Peteiro J, et al. Prognostic
value of reduced heart rate reserve during exercise inhypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Clin Med . 2021;10:
1347 .
12.Rodrigues T, Raposo SC, Brito D, et al. Prognostic
relevance of exercise testing in hypertrophic cardio-myopathy. A systematic review. Int J Cardiol .
2021;339:83 –92.
13.Maron MS, Olivotto I, Betocchi S, et al. Effect of
left ventricular out ﬂow tract obstruction on clinical
outcome in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. N Engl J
Med. 2003;348:295 –303.
14.Marwick TH, Nakatani S, Haluska B, et al. Provo-
cation of latent left ventricular out ﬂow tract gradientsJACC VOL. 83, NO. 23, 2024 Ommen et al
JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –2405 2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline2387

with amyl nitrite and exercise in hypertrophic cardio-
myopathy. Am J Cardiol . 1995;75:805 –809.
15.Cui H, Schaff HV, Olson TP, et al. Cardiopulmonary
exercise test in patients with obstructive hypertrophiccardiomyopathy. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2022:
S0022-5223(22)00619-5 .
16.Smith JR, Layrisse V, Medina-Inojosa JR, et al.
Predictors of exercise capacity following septal
myectomy in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyop-athy. Eur J Prev Cardiol . 2020;27:1066 –1073 .
17.Woo A, Williams WG, Choi R, et al. Clinical and
echocardiographic determinants of long-term survivalafter surgical myectomy in obstructive hypertrophiccardiomyopathy. Circulation . 2005;111:2033 –2041 .
18.Feiner E, Arabadjian M, Winson G, et al. Post-
prandial upright exercise echocardiography in hyper-trophic cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2013;61:
2487 –2488 .
6.8. Genetics and Family Screening
1.Ahmad F, McNally EM, Ackerman MJ, et al. Estab-
lishment of specialized clinical cardiovascular geneticsprograms: recognizing the need and meeting stan-dards: a scienti ﬁc statement from the American Heart
Association. Circ Genom Precis Med . 2019;12:
e000054 .
2.Charron P, Arad M, Arbustini E, et al. Genetic
counselling and testing in cardiomyopathies: a position
statement of the European Society of CardiologyWorking Group on Myocardial and Pericardial Diseases.Eur Heart J . 2010;31:2715 –2726 .
3.Maron BJ, Maron MS, Semsarian C. Genetics of hy-
pertrophic cardiomyopathy after 20 years: clinicalperspectives. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2012;60:705 –715.
4.Ingles J, Sarina T, Yeates L, et al. Clinical predictors
of genetic testing outcomes in hypertrophic cardio-
myopathy. Genet Med . 2013;15:972 –977.
5.van Velzen HG, Schinkel AFL, Baart SJ, et al. Out-
comes of contemporary family screening in hypertro-
phic cardiomyopathy. Circ Genom Precis Med . 2018;11:
e001896 .
6.Ranthe MF, Carstensen L, Oyen N, et al. Risk of
cardiomyopathy in younger persons with a family his-tory of death from cardiomyopathy: a nationwidefamily study in a cohort of 3.9 million persons. Circu-
lation . 2015;132:1013 –1019 .
7.Lafreniere-Roula M, Bolkier Y, Zahavich L, et al.
Family screening for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: is
it time to change practice guidelines? Eur Heart J .
2019;40:3672 –
3681 .
8.Alfares AA, Kelly MA, McDermott G, et al. Results of
clinical genetic testing of 2,912 probands with hyper-trophic cardiomyopathy: expanded panels offer limitedadditional sensitivity. Genet Med . 2015;17:880 –888.
9.Bagnall RD, Ingles J, Dinger ME, et al. Whole
genome sequencing improves outcomes of genetictesting in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
J Am Coll Cardiol . 2018;72:419 –429.
10.Ho CY, Day SM, Ashley EA, et al. Genotype and
lifetime burden of disease in hypertrophic cardiomy-
opathy: insights from the Sarcomeric Human Cardio-myopathy Registry (SHaRE). Circulation . 2018;138:
1387 –1398 .
11.Ingles J, Goldstein J, Thaxton C, et al. Evaluating
the clinical validity of hypertrophic cardiomyopathygenes. Circ Genom Precis Med . 2019;12:e002460 .12.Ingles J, Burns C, Funke B. Pathogenicity of hy-
pertrophic cardiomyopathy variants: a path forwardtogether. Circ Cardiovasc Genet . 2017;10:e001916 .
13.Maron BJ, Roberts WC, Arad M, et al. Clinical
outcome and phenotypic expression in LAMP2 car-diomyopathy. JAMA . 2009;301:1253 –1259 .
14.Desai MY, Ommen SR, McKenna WJ, et al. Imaging
phenotype versus genotype in hypertrophic cardio-
myopathy. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging . 2011;4:156 –168.
15.Ingles J, Yeates L, Semsarian C. The emerging role
of the cardiac genetic counselor. Heart Rhythm .
2011;8:1958 –1962 .
16.Richards S, Aziz N, Bale S, et al. Standards and
guidelines for the interpretation of sequence variants:a joint consensus recommendation of the AmericanCollege of Medical Genetics and Genomics and theAssociation for Molecular Pathology. Genet Med .
2015;17:405 –424.
17.Ouellette AC, Mathew J, Manickaraj AK, et al.
Clinical genetic testing in pediatric cardiomyopathy: isbigger better? Clin Genet . 2018;93:33 –40.
18.Jensen MK, Havndrup O, Christiansen M, et al.
Penetrance of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in chil-
dren and adolescents: a 12-year follow-up study of
clinical screening and predictive genetic testing. Cir-
culation . 2013;127:48 –54.
19.Morita H, Rehm HL, Menesses A, et al. Shared
genetic causes of cardiac hypertrophy in children and
adults. N Engl J Med . 2008;358:1899 –
1908 .
20.Christiaans I, Birnie E, Bonsel GJ, et al. Manifest
disease, risk factors for sudden cardiac death, andcardiac events in a large nationwide cohort of predic-tively tested hypertrophic cardiomyopathy mutation
carriers: determining the best cardiological screening
strategy. Eur Heart J . 2011;32:1161 –1170 .
21.Semsarian C, Ingles J, Wilde AAM. Sudden cardiac
death in the young: the molecular autopsy and apractical approach to surviving relatives. Eur Heart J .
2015;36:1290 –1296 .
22.Bagnall RD, Weintraub RG, Ingles J, et al.
A prospective study of sudden cardiac death amongchildren and young adults. N Engl J Med . 2016;374:
2441 –2452 .
23.Das KJ, Ingles J, Bagnall RD, et al. Determining
pathogenicity of genetic variants in hypertrophic car-diomyopathy: importance of periodic reassessment.Genet Med . 2014;16:286 –293.
24.Manrai AK, Funke BH, Rehm HL, et al. Genetic
misdiagnoses and the potential for health disparities.N Engl J Med . 2016;375:655 –665.
25.Mathew J, Zahavich L, Lafreniere-Roula M, et al.
Utility of genetics for risk strati ﬁcation in pediatric
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Clin Genet . 2018;93:
310–319.
26.Ingles J, Burns C, Bagnall RD, et al. Nonfamilial
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: prevalence, naturalhistory, and clinical implications. Circ Cardiovasc Genet .
2017;10:e001620 .
27.Ingles J, Doolan A, Chiu C, et al. Compound and
double mutations in patients with hypertrophic car-diomyopathy: implications for genetic testing andcounselling. J Med Genet . 2005;42:e59 .
28.Norrish G, Jager J, Field E, et al. Yield of clinical
screening for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in childﬁrst-degree relatives: evidence for a change in para-
digm. Circulation . 2019;140:184 –192.
29.Aronson SJ, Clark EH, Varugheese M, et al.
Communicating new knowledge on previously re-
ported genetic variants. Genet Med . 2012;14:713 –719.
30.Semsarian C, Ingles J, Maron MS, et al. New per-
spectives on the prevalence of hypertrophic cardio-myopathy. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2015;65:1249 –1254 .
31.David KL, Best RG, Brenman LM, et al. Patient re-
contact after revision of genomic test results: points
to consider
—a statement of the American College of
Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG). Genet Med .
2019;21:769 –771.
32.Deignan JL, Chung WK, Kearney HM, et al. Points
to consider in the reevaluation and reanalysis ofgenomic test results: a statement of the AmericanCollege of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG).
Genet Med . 2019;21:1267 –1270 .
33.Caleshu C, Kasparian NA, Edwards KS, et al.
Interdisciplinary psychosocial care for families withinherited cardiovascular diseases. Trends Cardiovasc
Med. 2016;26:647 –653.
34.Elliott P, Baker R, Pasquale F, et al. Prevalence of
Anderson-Fabry disease in patients with hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy: the European Anderson-Fabry Dis-ease survey. Heart . 2011;97:1957 –1960 .
35.Rueda M, Wagner JL, Phillips TC, et al. Molecular
autopsy for sudden death in the young: is data ag-gregation the key? Front Cardiovasc Med . 2017;4:72 .
36.Torkamani A, Muse ED, Spencer EG, et al. Molec-
ular autopsy for sudden unexpected death. JAMA .
2016;316:1492 –1494 .
37.Garcia J, Tahiliani J, Johnson NM, et al. Clinical
genetic testing for the cardiomyopathies and ar-rhythmias: a systematic framework for establishingclinical validity and addressing genotypic and pheno-
typic heterogeneity. Front Cardiovasc Med . 2016;3:20 .
38.Miron A, Lafreniere-Roula M, Steve Fan CP, et al.
A validated model for sudden cardiac death risk pre-diction in pediatric hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Cir-
culation . 2020;142:217 –229.
6.9. Individuals Who Are Genotype-Positive,
Phenotype-Negative
1.Jensen MK, Havndrup O, Christiansen M, et al.
Penetrance of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in chil-dren and adolescents. Circulation . 2013;127:48 –54.
2.Lafreniere-Roula M, Bolkier Y, Zahavich L, et al.
Family screening for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: isit time to change practice guidelines? Eur Heart J .
2019;40:3672 –3681 .
3.Maurizi N, Michels M, Rowin EJ, et al. Clinical course
and signi ﬁcance of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
without left ventricular hypertrophy. Circulation .
2019;139:830 –833.
4.Norrish G, Jager J, Field E, et al. Yield of clinical
screening for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in child
ﬁ
rst-degree relatives: evidence for a change in para-
digm. Circulation . 2019;140:184 –192.
5.Vermeer AMC, Clur S-AB, Blom NA, et al. Pene-
trance of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in children whoare mutation positive. J Pediatr . 2017;188:91 –95.
6.Christiaans I, Birnie E, Bonsel GJ, et al. Manifest
disease, risk factors for sudden cardiac death, and
cardiac events in a large nationwide cohort ofOmmen et al J A C CV O L .8 3 ,N O .2 3 ,2 0 2 4
2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –24052388

predictively tested hypertrophic cardiomyopathy mu-
tation carriers: determining the best cardiologicalscreening strategy. Eur Heart J . 2011;32:1161 –1170 .
7.Lampert R, Ackerman MJ, Marino BS, et al. Vigorous
exercise in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.JAMA Cardiol . 2023;8:595 –605.
8.Gray B, Ingles J, Semsarian C. Natural history of
genotype positive-phenotype negative patients with
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Int J Cardiol . 2011;152:
258–259.
9.Captur G, Lopes LR, Mohun TJ, et al. Prediction of
sarcomere mutations in subclinical hypertrophic car-
diomyopathy. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging . 2014;7:863 –
871.
10.Ho CY, Day SM, Colan SD, et al. The burden of early
phenotypes and the in ﬂuence of wall thickness in hy-
pertrophic cardiomyopathy mutation carriers: ﬁndings
from the HCMNet study. JAMA Cardiol . 2017;2:419 –
428.
11.Vigneault DM, Yang E, Jensen PJ, et al. Left ven-
tricular strain is abnormal in preclinical and overt hy-pertrophic cardiomyopathy: cardiac MR feature
tracking. Radiology . 2019;290:640 –648.
12.Williams LK, Misurka J, Ho CY, et al. Multilayer
myocardial mechanics in genotype-positive left ventric-ular hypertrophy-negative patients with hypertrophiccardiomyopathy. Am J Cardiol . 2018;122:1754 –1760 .
13.Ho CY, Lakdawala NK, Cirino AL, et al. Diltiazem
treatment for pre-clinical hypertrophic cardiomyopa-thy sarcomere mutation carriers: a pilot randomizedtrial to modify disease expression. J Am Coll Cardiol
HF. 2015;3:180 –188.
7.1.1. SCD Risk Assessment in Adults With HCM
1.Maron MS, Rowin EJ, Wessler BS, et al. Enhanced
American College of Cardiology/American Heart As-
sociation strategy for prevention of sudden cardiac
death in high-risk patients with hypertrophic cardio-myopathy. JAMA Cardiol . 2019;4:644 –657.
2.O’Mahony C, Jichi F, Ommen SR, et al. International
External Validation Study of the 2014 European Soci-
ety of Cardiology Guidelines on Sudden Cardiac Death
Prevention in Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy (EVI-DENCE-HCM). Circulation . 2018;137:1015 –1023 .
3.Elliott PM, Sharma S, Varnava A, et al. Survival after
cardiac arrest or sustained ventricular tachycardia in
patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 1999;33:1596 –1601 .
4.Spirito P, Autore C, Rapezzi C, et al. Syncope and
risk of sudden death in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.Circulation . 2009;119:1703 –1710 .
5.Bos JM, Maron BJ, Ackerman MJ, et al. Role of
family history of sudden death in risk strati ﬁcation and
prevention of sudden death with implantable de-ﬁbrillators in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Am J
Cardiol . 2010;106:1481 –1486 .
6.Dimitrow PP, Chojnowska L, Rudzinski T, et al.
Sudden death in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: old riskfactors re-assessed in a new model of maximalizedfollow-up. Eur Heart J . 2010;31:3084 –3093 .
7.Spirito P, Bellone P, Harris KM, et al. Magnitude of
left ventricular hypertrophy and risk of sudden deathin hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. N Engl J Med .
2000;342:1778 –1785 .
8.Autore C, Bernabò P, Barillà CS, et al. The prog-
nostic importance of left ventricular out ﬂowobstruction in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy varies in
relation to the severity of symptoms. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2005;45:1076 –1080 .
9.Elliott PM, Gimeno Blanes JR, Mahon NG, et al.
Relation between severity of left-ventricular hyper-trophy and prognosis in patients with hypertrophiccardiomyopathy. Lancet . 2001;357:420 –424.
10.Harris KM, Spirito P, Maron MS, et al. Prevalence,
clinical pro ﬁle, and signi ﬁcance of left ventricular
remodeling in the end-stage phase of hypertrophiccardiomyopathy. Circulation . 2006;114:216 –225.
11.Rowin EJ, Maron BJ, Haas TS, et al. Hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy with left ventricular apical aneurysm:
implications for risk strati ﬁcation and management.
J Am Coll Cardiol . 2017;69:761 –773.
12.Ichida M, Nishimura Y, Kario K. Clinical signi ﬁcance
of left ventricular apical aneurysms in hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy patients: the role of diagnostic elec-
trocardiography. J Cardiol . 2014;64:265 –272.
13.Monserrat L, Elliott PM, Gimeno JR, et al. Non-
sustained ventricular tachycardia in hypertrophic car-
diomyopathy: an independent marker of sudden death
risk in young patients. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2003;42:873 –
879.
14.Wang W, Lian Z, Rowin EJ, et al. Prognostic im-
plications of nonsustained ventricular tachycardia inhigh-risk patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol . 2017;10:e004604 .
15.Corona-Villalobos CP, Sorensen LL, Pozios I, et al.
Left ventricular wall thickness in patients with hyper-trophic cardiomyopathy: a comparison between cardiac
magnetic resonance imaging and echocardiography. Int
J Cardiovasc Imaging . 2016;32:945 –954.
16.Bois JP, Geske JB, Foley TA, et al. Comparison of
maximal wall thickness in hypertrophic cardiomyopa-thy differs between magnetic resonance imaging and
transthoracic echocardiography. Am J Cardiol .
2017;119:643 –650.
17.Maron MS, Lesser JR, Maron BJ. Management im-
plications of massive left ventricular hypertrophy inhypertrophic cardiomyopathy signi ﬁcantly under-
estimated by echocardiography but identi ﬁed by car-
diovascular magnetic resonance. Am J Cardiol .
2010;105:1842 –1843 .
18.Weng Z, Yao J, Chan RH, et al. Prognostic value of
LGE-CMR in HCM: a meta-analysis. J Am Coll Cardiol
Img. 2016;9:1392 –1402 .
19.Chan RH, Maron BJ, Olivotto I, et al. Prognostic
value of quantitative contrast-enhanced cardiovascu-lar magnetic resonance for the evaluation of suddendeath risk in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopa-
thy. Circulation . 2014;130:484 –495.
20.Mentias A, Raeisi-Giglou P, Smedira NG, et al. Late
gadolinium enhancement in patients with hypertrophiccardiomyopathy and preserved systolic function. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2018;72:857 –870.
21.Ismail TF, Jabbour A, Gulati A, et al. Role of late
gadolinium enhancement cardiovascular magneticresonance in the risk strati ﬁcation of hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy. Heart . 2014;100:1851 –1858 .
22.O’Mahony C, Jichi F, Pavlou M, et al. A novel
clinical risk prediction model for sudden cardiac deathin hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM risk-SCD). Eur
Heart J . 2014;35:2010 –2020 .
23.Binder J, Attenhofer Jost CH, Klarich KW, et al.
Apical hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: prevalence andcorrelates of apical outpouching. J Am Soc Echo-
cardiogr . 2011;24:775 –781.
24.Rowin EJ, Maron BJ, Carrick RT, et al. Outcomes in
patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and leftventricular systolic dysfunction. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2020;75:3033 –3043 .
25.Marstrand P, Han L, Day SM, et al. Hypertrophic
Cardiomyopathy with Left Ventricular Systolic
Dysfunction: Insights from the SHaRe Registry. Circu-
lation . 2020:1371 –1383 .
26.Maron BJ, Spirito P, Shen W-K, et al. Implantable
cardioverter-de ﬁbrillators and prevention of sudden
cardiac death in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. JAMA .
2007;298:405 –412.
27.Vriesendorp PA, Schinkel AFL, Van Cleemput J,
et al. Implantable cardioverter-de ﬁbrillators in hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathy: patient outcomes, rate of
appropriate and inappropriate interventions, andcomplications. Am Heart J . 2013;166:496 –502.
28.Wells S, Rowin EJ, Bhatt V, et al. Association be-
tween race and clinical pro ﬁle of patients referred for
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Circulation . 2018;137:
1973 –1975 .
29.Olivotto I, Maron MS, Adabag AS, et al. Gender-
related differences in the clinical presentation and
outcome of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2005;46:480 –487.
30.Elliott PM, Poloniecki J, Dickie S, et al. Sudden
death in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: identi ﬁcation
of high risk patients. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2000;36:2212 –
2218 .
31.Maron BJ, Rowin EJ, Casey SA, et al. Hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy in adulthood associated with low
cardiovascular mortality with contemporary manage-
ment strategies. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2015;65:1915 –1928 .
32.Maron BJ, Rowin EJ, Casey SA, et al. Risk strati ﬁ-
cation and outcome of patients with hypertrophiccardiomyopathy $60 years of age. Circulation
.
2013;127:585 –593.
33.Ostman-Smith I, Wettrell G, Keeton B, et al. Age-
and gender-speci ﬁc mortality rates in childhood hy-
pertrophic cardiomyopathy. Eur Heart J . 2008;29:
1160 –1167.
34.Maron BJ. Risk strati ﬁcation and role of implant-
able de ﬁbrillators for prevention of sudden death in
patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Circ J .
2010;74:2271 –2282 .
35.Miron A, Lafreniere-Roula M, Steve Fan CP, et al.
A validated model for sudden cardiac death risk pre-diction in pediatric hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Cir-
culation . 2020;142:217 –229.
36.Norrish G, Ding T, Field E, et al. Development of a
novel risk prediction model for sudden cardiac death inchildhood hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM Risk-Kids). JAMA Cardiol . 2019;4:918 –927.
37.Romeo F, Cianfrocca C, Pelliccia F, et al. Long-term
prognosis in children with hypertrophic cardiomyopa-thy: an analysis of 37 patients aged less than or equalto 14 years at diagnosis. Clin Cardiol . 1990;13:101 –107.
38.Yetman AT, Hamilton RM, Benson LN, et al. Long-
term outcome and prognostic determinants in childrenwith hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll Cardiol .
1998;32:1943 –1950 .
39.McMahon CJ, Nagueh SF, Pignatelli RH, et al.
Characterization of left ventricular diastolic functionJACC VOL. 83, NO. 23, 2024 Ommen et al
JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –2405 2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline2389

by tissue Doppler imaging and clinical status in chil-
dren with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Circulation .
2004;109:1756 –1762 .
40.Nugent AW, Daubeney PEF, Chondros P, et al.
Clinical features and outcomes of childhood hyper-trophic cardiomyopathy: results from a nationalpopulation-based study. Circulation . 2005;112:1332 –
1338 .
41.Ostman-Smith I, Wettrell G, Keeton B, et al.
Echocardiographic and electrocardiographic identi ﬁ-
cation of those children with hypertrophic cardiomy-opathy who should be considered at high-risk of dyingsuddenly. Cardiol Young . 2005;15:632 –642.
42.Colan SD, Lipshultz SE, Lowe AM, et al. Epidemi-
ology and cause-speci ﬁc outcome of hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy in children: ﬁndings from the Pediatric
Cardiomyopathy Registry. Circulation . 2007;115:773 –
781.
43.Kaski JP, Tomé Esteban MT, Lowe M, et al. Out-
comes after implantable cardioverter-de ﬁbrillator
treatment in children with hypertrophic cardiomyop-athy. Heart . 2007;93:372 –374.
44.Decker JA, Rossano JW, Smith EO, et al. Risk fac-
tors and mode of death in isolated hypertrophic car-diomyopathy in children. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2009;54:
250 –254.
45.Maskatia SA, Decker JA, Spinner JA, et al.
Restrictive physiology is associated with poor out-
comes in children with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.Pediatr Cardiol . 2012;33:141 –149.
46.Moak JP, Leifer ES, Tripodi D, et al. Long-term
follow-up of children and adolescents diagnosed with
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: risk factors for adversearrhythmic events. Pediatr Cardiol . 2011;32:1096 –
1105 .
47.Hickey EJ, McCrindle BW, Larsen S-H, et al. Hy-
pertrophic cardiomyopathy in childhood: disease nat-
ural history, impact of obstruction, and its in ﬂuence on
survival. Ann Thorac Surg . 2012;93:840 –848.
48.Chaowu Y, Shihua Z, Jian L, et al. Cardiovascular
magnetic resonance characteristics in children with
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Circ Heart Fail . 2013;6:
1013 –1020 .
49.
Lipshultz SE, Orav EJ, Wilkinson JD, et al. Risk
stratiﬁcation at diagnosis for children with hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy: an analysis of data from the Pediatric
Cardiomyopathy Registry. Lancet . 2013;382:1889 –1897 .
50.Kamp AN, Von Bergen NH, Henrikson CA, et al.
Implanted de ﬁbrillators in young hypertrophic cardio-
myopathy patients: a multicenter study. Pediatr Car-
diol. 2013;34:1620 –1627 .
51.Maron BJ, Spirito P, Ackerman MJ, et al. Prevention
of sudden cardiac death with implantable cardioverter-deﬁbrillators in children and adolescents with hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2013;61:
1527 –1535 .
52.Smith BM, Dorfman AL, Yu S, et al. Clinical signif-
icance of late gadolinium enhancement inpatients <20 years of age with hypertrophic cardio-
myopathy. Am J Cardiol . 2014;113:1234 –1239 .
53.El-Saiedi SA, Seliem ZS, Esmail RI. Hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy: prognostic factors and survival anal-ysis in 128 Egyptian patients. Cardiol Young . 2014;24:
702–708.
54.Bharucha T, Lee KJ, Daubeney PEF, et al. Sudden
death in childhood cardiomyopathy: results from along-term national population-based study. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2015;65:2302 –2310 .
55.Windram JD, Benson LN, Dragelescu A, et al. Dis-
tribution of hypertrophy and late gadolinium
enhancement in children and adolescents with hyper-trophic cardiomyopathy. Congenit Heart Dis . 2015;10:
E258 –E267 .
56.Zió łkowska L, Turska-Kmie /C19c A, Petryka J, et al.
Predictors of long-term outcome in children with hy-
pertrophic cardiomyopathy. Pediatr Cardiol . 2016;37:
448 –458.
57.Mathew J, Zahavich L, Lafreniere-Roula M, et al.
Utility of genetics for risk strati ﬁcation in pediatric
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Clin Genet . 2018;93:
310–319.
58.Maurizi N, Passantino S, Spaziani G, et al. Long-
term outcomes of pediatric-onset hypertrophic car-diomyopathy and age-speci ﬁc risk factors for lethal
arrhythmic events. JAMA Cardiol . 2018;3:520 –525.
59.Balaji S, DiLorenzo MP, Fish FA, et al. Risk factors
for lethal arrhythmic events in children and adoles-cents with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and animplantable de ﬁbrillator: an international multicenter
study. Heart Rhythm . 2019;16:1462 –1467 .
60.Norrish G, Ding T, Field E, et al. A validation study
of the European Society of Cardiology guidelines forrisk strati ﬁcation of sudden cardiac death in childhood
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Europace . 2019;21:
1559 –1565 .
61.Norrish G, Cantarutti N, Pissaridou E, et al. Risk
factors for sudden cardiac death in childhood hyper-trophic cardiomyopathy: a systematic review andmeta-analysis. Eur J Prev Cardiol . 2017;24:1220 –1230 .
62.Norrish G, Qu C, Field E, et al. External validation
of the HCM Risk-Kids model for predicting sudden
cardiac death in childhood hypertrophic cardiomyop-
athy. Eur J Prev Cardiol . 2022;29:678 –686.
63.Conway J, Min S, Villa C, et al. The prevalence and
association of exercise test abnormalities with suddencardiac death and transplant-free survival in childhood
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Circulation . 2023;147:
718–727.
7.1.2. SCD Risk Assessment in Children and
Adolescents With HCM
1.Miron A, Lafreniere-Roula M, Steve Fan CP, et al.
A validated model for sudden cardiac death risk pre-
diction in pediatric hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Cir-
culation . 2020;142:217 –229.
2.Norrish G, Ding T, Field E, et al. Development of a
novel risk prediction model for sudden cardiac death inchildhood hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM Risk-Kids). JAMA Cardiol . 2019;4:918 –927.
3.Maurizi N, Passantino S, Spaziani G, et al. Long-term
outcomes of pediatric-onset hypertrophic cardiomy-opathy and age-speci ﬁc risk factors for lethal
arrhythmic events. JAMA Cardiol . 2018;3:520 –525.
4.Balaji S, DiLorenzo MP, Fish FA, et al. Risk factors
for lethal arrhythmic events in children and adoles-cents with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and animplantable de ﬁbrillator: an international multicenter
study. Heart Rhythm . 2019;16:1462
–1467 .
5.Norrish G, Ding T, Field E, et al. A validation study of
the European Society of Cardiology guidelines for risk
strati ﬁcation of sudden cardiac death in childhoodhypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Europace . 2019;21:
1559 –1565 .
6.Norrish G, Cantarutti N, Pissaridou E, et al. Risk
factors for sudden cardiac death in childhood hyper-trophic cardiomyopathy: a systematic review andmeta-analysis. Eur J Prev Cardiol . 2017;24:1220 –1230 .
7.Maron BJ, Rowin EJ, Casey SA, et al. Hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy in children, adolescents, and young
adults associated with low cardiovascular mortalitywith contemporary management strategies. Circula-
tion. 2016;133:62 –73.
8.Rowin EJ, Sridharan A, Madias C, et al. Prediction
and prevention of sudden death in young patients(<20 years) with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Am J
Cardiol . 2020;128:75 –83.
9.Chaowu Y, Shihua Z, Jian L, et al. Cardiovascular
magnetic resonance characteristics in children with
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Circ Heart Fail . 2013;6:
1013 –1020 .
10.Smith BM, Dorfman AL, Yu S, et al. Clinical signif-
icance of late gadolinium enhancement inpatients <20 years of age with hypertrophic cardio-
myopathy. Am J Cardiol . 2014;113:1234 –1239 .
11.Windram JD, Benson LN, Dragelescu A, et al. Distri-
bution of hypertrophy and late gadolinium enhancementin children and adolescents with hypertrophic cardio-myopathy. Congenit Heart Dis . 2015;10:E258 –E267 .
12.Norrish G, Qu C, Field E, et al. External validation of
the HCM Risk-Kids model for predicting sudden cardiac
death in childhood hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Eur J
Prev Cardiol . 2022;29:678 –686.
13.Bharucha T, Lee KJ, Daubeney PEF, et al. Sudden
death in childhood cardiomyopathy: results from along-term national population-based study. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2015;65:2302 –2310 .
14.Mathew J, Zahavich L, Lafreniere-Roula M, et al.
Utility of genetics for risk strati ﬁcation in pediatric
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Clin Genet . 2018;93:
310–319.
15.Rowin EJ, Maron BJ, Haas TS, et al. Hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy with left ventricular apical aneurysm:
implications for risk strati ﬁcation and management.
J Am Coll Cardiol . 2017;69:761 –773.
16.Ichida M, Nishimura Y, Kario K. Clinical signi ﬁcance
of left ventricular apical aneurysms in hypertrophiccardiomyopathy patients: the role of diagnostic elec-trocardiography. J Cardiol . 2014;64:265 –272.
17.Corona-Villalobos CP, Sorensen LL, Pozios I, et al.
Left ventricular wall thickness in patients with hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathy: a comparison between cardiac
magnetic resonance imaging and echocardiography. Int
J Cardiovasc Imaging .2 0 1 6 ; 3 2 : 9 4 5 –954.
18.Bois JP, Geske JB, Foley TA, et al. Comparison of
maximal wall thickness in hypertrophic cardiomyopa-thy differs between magnetic resonance imaging andtransthoracic echocardiography. Am J Cardiol .
2017;119:643 –650.
19.Maron MS, Lesser JR, Maron BJ. Management im-
plications of massive left ventricular hypertrophy in
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy signi ﬁcantly under-
estimated by echocardiography but identi ﬁed by car-
diovascular magnetic resonance. Am J Cardiol .
2010;105:1842 –1843 .
20.Weng Z, Yao J, Chan RH, et al. Prognostic value of
LGE-CMR in HCM: a meta-analysis. J Am Coll Cardiol
Img. 2016;9:1392 –1402 .Ommen et al J A C CV O L .8 3 ,N O .2 3 ,2 0 2 4
2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –24052390

21.Chan RH, Maron BJ, Olivotto I, et al. Prognostic
value of quantitative contrast-enhanced cardiovascu-lar magnetic resonance for the evaluation of suddendeath risk in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopa-
thy. Circulation . 2014;130:484 –495.
22.Mentias A, Raeisi-Giglou P, Smedira NG, et al. Late
gadolinium enhancement in patients with hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy and preserved systolic function. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2018;72:857 –870.
23.Maron MS, Rowin EJ, Wessler BS, et al. Enhanced
American College of Cardiology/American Heart As-sociation strategy for prevention of sudden cardiacdeath in high-risk patients with hypertrophic cardio-myopathy. JAMA Cardiol . 2019;4:644 –657.
24.Harris KM, Spirito P, Maron MS, et al. Prevalence,
clinical pro ﬁle, and signi ﬁcance of left ventricular
remodeling in the end-stage phase of hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy. Circulation . 2006;114:216 –225.
25.Ismail TF, Jabbour A, Gulati A, et al. Role of late
gadolinium enhancement cardiovascular magneticresonance in the risk strati ﬁcation of hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy. Heart . 2014;100:1851 –1858 .
26.Rowin EJ, Maron BJ, Carrick RT, et al. Outcomes in
patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and leftventricular systolic dysfunction. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2020;75:3033 –3043 .
27.Marstrand P, Han L, Day SM, et al. Hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy with left ventricular systolic
dysfunction: insights from the SHaRe Registry. Circu-
lation . 2020;141:1371 –1383 .
28.Maron BJ, Rowin EJ, Casey SA, et al. Hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathy in adulthood associated withlow cardiovascular mortality with contemporarymanagement strategies. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2015;65:
1915 –1928 .
29.Conway J, Min S, Villa C, et al. The prevalence and
association of exercise test abnormalities with sudden
cardiac death and transplant-free survival in childhood
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Circulation . 2023;147:
718–727.
30.Elliott PM, Sharma S, Varnava A, et al. Survival
after cardiac arrest or sustained ventricular tachycardiain patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 1999;33:1596 –1601 .
31.
Bos JM, Maron BJ, Ackerman MJ, et al. Role of
family history of sudden death in risk strati ﬁcation and
prevention of sudden death with implantable de-
ﬁbrillators in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Am J
Cardiol . 2010;106:1481 –1486 .
32.Spirito P, Bellone P, Harris KM, et al. Magnitude of
left ventricular hypertrophy and risk of sudden deathin hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. N Engl J Med .
2000;342:1778 –1785 .
33.Elliott PM, Gimeno Blanes JR, Mahon NG, et al.
Relation between severity of left-ventricular hyper-trophy and prognosis in patients with hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy. Lancet . 2001;357:420 –424.
34.Spirito P, Autore C, Rapezzi C, et al. Syncope and
risk of sudden death in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.Circulation . 2009;119:1703 –1710 .
35.Monserrat L, Elliott PM, Gimeno JR, et al. Non-
sustained ventricular tachycardia in hypertrophic car-diomyopathy: an independent marker of sudden deathrisk in young patients. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2003;42:873 –
879.36.Wang W, Lian Z, Rowin EJ, et al. Prognostic im-
plications of nonsustained ventricular tachycardia inhigh-risk patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol . 2017;10:e004604 .
37.Ostman-Smith I, Wettrell G, Keeton B, et al.
Echocardiographic and electrocardiographic identi ﬁ-
cation of those children with hypertrophic cardiomy-
opathy who should be considered at high-risk of dyingsuddenly. Cardiol Young . 2005;15:632 –642.
7.2. Patient Selection for ICD Placement
1.Maron BJ, Nishimura RA, Maron MS. Shared
decision-making in HCM. Nat Rev Cardiol . 2017;14:125 –
126.
2.Maron MS, Rowin EJ, Wessler BS, et al. Enhanced
American College of Cardiology/American Heart As-
sociation strategy for prevention of sudden cardiac
death in high-risk patients with hypertrophic cardio-myopathy. JAMA Cardiol . 2019;4:644 –657.
3.O’Mahony C, Tome-Esteban M, Lambiase PD, et al.
A validation study of the 2003 American College ofCardiology/European Society of Cardiology and 2011American College of Cardiology Foundation/AmericanHeart Association risk strati ﬁcation and treatment al-
gorithms for sudden cardiac death in patients with
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Heart . 2013;99:534 –
541.
4.Maron BJ, Spirito P, Shen W-K, et al. Implantable
cardioverter-de ﬁbrillators and prevention of sudden
cardiac death in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. JAMA .
2007;298:405 –412.
5.Vriesendorp PA, Schinkel AFL, Van Cleemput J, et al.
Implantable cardioverter-de ﬁbrillators in hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy: patient outcomes, rate of appropriate
and inappropriate interventions, and complications.Am Heart J . 2013;166:496 –502.
6.Elliott PM, Sharma S, Varnava A, et al. Survival after
cardiac arrest or sustained ventricular tachycardia inpatients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 1999;33:1596 –1601 .
7.Spirito P, Autore C, Rapezzi C, et al. Syncope and risk
of sudden death in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Cir-
culation . 2009;119:1703 –1710 .
8.Bos JM, Maron BJ, Ackerman MJ, et al. Role of
family history of sudden death in risk strati ﬁcation and
prevention of sudden death with implantable de-
ﬁbrillators in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Am J
Cardiol . 2010;106:1481 –1486 .
9.Dimitrow PP, Chojnowska L, Rudzinski T, et al.
Sudden death in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: old riskfactors re-assessed in a new model of maximalizedfollow-up. Eur Heart J . 2010;31:3084 –3093 .
10.Spirito P, Bellone P, Harris KM, et al. Magnitude of
left ventricular hypertrophy and risk of sudden death
in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. N Engl J Med .
2000;342:1778 –1785 .
11.Autore C, Bernabò P, Barillà CS, et al. The prog-
nostic importance of left ventricular out ﬂow obstruc-
tion in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy varies in relationto the severity of symptoms. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2005;45:1076 –1080 .
12.Elliott PM, Gimeno Blanes JR, Mahon NG, et al.
Relation between severity of left-ventricular hyper-
trophy and prognosis in patients with hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy. Lancet . 2001;357:420 –424.13.Harris KM, Spirito P, Maron MS, et al. Preva-
lence, clinical pro ﬁle, and signi ﬁcance of left ven-
tricular remodeling in the end-stage phase ofhypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Circulation . 2006;114:
216
–225.
14.Rowin EJ, Maron BJ, Haas TS, et al. Hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy with left ventricular apical aneurysm:
implications for risk strati ﬁcation and management.
J Am Coll Cardiol . 2017;69:761 –773.
15.Ichida M, Nishimura Y, Kario K. Clinical signi ﬁcance
of left ventricular apical aneurysms in hypertrophiccardiomyopathy patients: the role of diagnostic elec-trocardiography. J Cardiol . 2014;64:265 –272.
16.Monserrat L, Elliott PM, Gimeno JR, et al. Non-
sustained ventricular tachycardia in hypertrophic car-diomyopathy: an independent marker of sudden death
risk in young patients. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2003;42:873 –
879.
17.Wang W, Lian Z, Rowin EJ, et al. Prognostic im-
plications of nonsustained ventricular tachycardia inhigh-risk patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol . 2017;10:e004604 .
18.Ismail TF, Jabbour A, Gulati A, et al. Role of late
gadolinium enhancement cardiovascular magneticresonance in the risk strati ﬁcation of hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy. Heart . 2014;100:1851 –1858 .
19.O’Mahony C, Jichi F, Pavlou M, et al. A novel
clinical risk prediction model for sudden cardiac death
in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM risk-SCD). Eur
Heart J . 2014;35:2010 –2020 .
20.Rowin EJ, Maron BJ, Carrick RT, et al. Outcomes in
patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and leftventricular systolic dysfunction. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2020;75:3033 –3043 .
21.Marstrand P, Han L, Day SM, et al. Hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy with left ventricular systolicdysfunction: insights from the SHaRe Registry. Circu-
lation . 2020:1371 –1383 .
22.Maron BJ, Spirito P, Ackerman MJ, et al. Preven-
tion of sudden cardiac death with implantablecardioverter-de ﬁbrillators in children and adolescents
with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2013;61:1527 –1535 .
23.Norrish G, Cantarutti N, Pissaridou E, et al. Risk
factors for sudden cardiac death in childhood hyper-trophic cardiomyopathy: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. Eur J Prev Cardiol . 2017;24:1220 –
1230 .
24.
Moak JP, Leifer ES, Tripodi D, et al. Long-term
follow-up of children and adolescents diagnosed withhypertrophic cardiomyopathy: risk factors for adversearrhythmic events. Pediatr Cardiol . 2011;32:1096 –
1105 .
25.Yetman AT, Hamilton RM, Benson LN, et al. Long-
term outcome and prognostic determinants in childrenwith hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll Cardiol .
1998;32:1943 –1950 .
26.Bharucha T, Lee KJ, Daubeney PEF, et al. Sudden
death in childhood cardiomyopathy: results from along-term national population-based study. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2015;65:2302 –2310 .
27.Kamp AN, Von Bergen NH, Henrikson CA, et al.
Implanted de ﬁbrillators in young hypertrophic cardio-
myopathy patients: a multicenter study. Pediatr Car-
diol. 2013;34:1620 –1627 .JACC VOL. 83, NO. 23, 2024 Ommen et al
JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –2405 2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline2391

28.Maron BJ, Rowin EJ, Casey SA, et al. Hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy in children, adolescents, and youngadults associated with low cardiovascular mortalitywith contemporary management strategies. Circula-
tion. 2016;133:62 –73.
29.Miron A, Lafreniere-Roula M, Steve Fan CP, et al.
A validated model for sudden cardiac death risk pre-
diction in pediatric hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Cir-
culation . 2020;142:217 –229.
30.Norrish G, Qu C, Field E, et al. External validation
of the HCM Risk-Kids model for predicting suddencardiac death in childhood hypertrophic cardiomyop-athy. Eur J Prev Cardiol . 2022;29:678 –686.
31.Chan RH, Maron BJ, Olivotto I, et al. Prognostic
value of quantitative contrast-enhanced cardiovascu-lar magnetic resonance for the evaluation of sudden
death risk in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopa-
thy. Circulation . 2014;130:484 –495.
32.Weng Z, Yao J, Chan RH, et al. Prognostic value of
LGE-CMR in HCM: a meta-analysis. J Am Coll Cardiol
Img. 2016;9:1392 –1402 .
33.Mentias A, Raeisi-Giglou P, Smedira NG, et al. Late
gadolinium enhancement in patients with hypertrophiccardiomyopathy and preserved systolic function. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2018;72:857 –870.
34.Smith BM, Dorfman AL, Yu S, et al. Clinical sig-
niﬁcance of late gadolinium enhancement in
patients <20 years of age with hypertrophic cardio-
myopathy. Am J Cardiol . 2014;113:1234 –1239 .
35.Axelsson Raja A, Farhad H, Valente AM, et al.
Prevalence and progression of late gadoliniumenhancement in children and adolescents with hyper-trophic cardiomyopathy. Circulation . 2018;138:782 –
792.
36.Lampert R, Olshansky B, Heidbuchel H, et al.
Safety of sports for athletes with implantablecardioverter-de ﬁbrillators: long-term results of a
prospective multinational registry. Circulation .
2017;135:2310 –2312 .
37.Maron BJ, Rowin EJ, Casey SA, et al. Risk strati ﬁ-
cation and outcome of patients with hypertrophiccardiomyopathy $60 years of age. Circulation .
2013;127:585 –593
.
38.Maron BJ, Rowin EJ, Casey SA, et al. Hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy in adulthood associated with lowcardiovascular mortality with contemporary manage-
ment strategies. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2015;65:1915 –1928 .
39.Rowin EJ, Sridharan A, Madias C, et al. Prediction
and prevention of sudden death in young patients
(<20 years) with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Am J
Cardiol . 2020;128:75 –83.
40.Balaji S, DiLorenzo MP, Fish FA, et al. Risk factors
for lethal arrhythmic events in children and adoles-cents with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and animplantable de ﬁbrillator: an international multicenter
study. Heart Rhythm . 2019;16:1462 –1467 .
41.Decker JA, Rossano JW, Smith EO, et al. Risk fac-
tors and mode of death in isolated hypertrophic car-
diomyopathy in children. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2009;54:
250 –254.
7.3. ICD Device Selection Considerations
1.Silvetti MS, Pazzano V, Verticelli L, et al. Subcu-
taneous implantable cardioverter-de ﬁbrillator: is it
ready for use in children and young adults? A single-centre study. Europace . 2018;20:1966 –1973 .2.Hauser RG, Maisel WH, Friedman PA, et al.
Longevity of Sprint Fidelis implantable cardioverter-deﬁbrillator leads and risk factors for failure: implica-
tions for patient management. Circulation . 2011;123:
358–363.
3.O’Mahony C, Lambiase PD, Quarta G, et al. The long-
term survival and the risks and bene ﬁts of implantable
cardioverter de ﬁbrillators in patients with hypertro-
phic cardiomyopathy. Heart . 2012;98:116 –125.
4.Lambiase PD, Gold MR, Hood M, et al. Evaluation of
subcutaneous ICD early performance in hypertrophiccardiomyopathy from the pooled EFFORTLESS and IDEcohorts. Heart Rhythm . 2016;13:1066 –1074 .
5.Frommeyer G, Dechering DG, Zumhagen S, et al.
Long-term follow-up of subcutaneous ICD systems in
patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a single-
center experience. Clin Res Cardiol . 2016;105:89 –93.
6.Weinstock J, Bader YH, Maron MS, et al. Subcu-
taneous implantable cardioverter de ﬁbrillator in pa-
tients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: an initialexperience. J Am Heart Assoc . 2016;5:e002488 .
7.Francia P, Adduci C, Semprini L, et al. Prognostic
implications of de ﬁbrillation threshold testing in pa-
tients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Cardiovasc
Electrophysiol . 2017;28:103 –108.
8.Okamura H, Friedman PA, Inoue Y, et al. Single-coil
deﬁbrillator leads yield satisfactory de ﬁbrillation
safety margin in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Circ J .
2016;80:2199 –2203 .
9.Quin EM, Cuoco FA, Forcina MS, et al. De ﬁbrillation
thresholds in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol . 2011;22:569 –572.
10.Nishimura RA, Trusty JM, Hayes DL, et al. Dual-
chamber pacing for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a
randomized, double-blind, crossover trial. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 1997;29:435 –441.
11.Kappenberger L, Linde C, Daubert C, et al. Pacing in
hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy. A random-ized crossover study. PIC Study Group. Eur Heart J .
1997;18:1249 –1256 .
12.Maron BJ, Nishimura RA, McKenna WJ, et al.
Assessment of permanent dual-chamber pacing as atreatment for drug-refractory symptomatic patients
with obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. A ran-
domized, double-blind, crossover study (M-PATHY).Circulation . 1999;99:2927 –2933 .
13.Mickelsen S, Bathina M, Hsu P, et al. Doppler
evaluation of the descending aorta in patients withhypertrophic cardiomyopathy: potential for assessingthe functional signi ﬁcance of out ﬂow tract gradients
and for optimizing pacemaker function. J Interv Card
Electrophysiol . 2004;11:47 –53.
14.Killu AM, Park J-Y, Sara JD, et al. Cardiac resynch-
ronization therapy in patients with end-stage hyper-trophic cardiomyopathy. Europace . 2018;20:82 –88.
15.Gu M, Jin H, Hua W, et al. Clinical outcome of
cardiac resynchronization therapy in dilated-phasehypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Geriatr Cardiol .
2017;14:238 –
244.
16.Rogers DPS, Marazia S, Chow AW, et al. Effect of
biventricular pacing on symptoms and cardiac remod-
elling in patients with end-stage hypertrophic cardio-
myopathy. Eur J Heart Fail . 2008;10:507 –513.
17.Rowin EJ, Mohanty S, Madias C, et al. Bene ﬁto f
cardiac resynchronization therapy in end-stagenonobstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. JA m
Coll Cardiol EP . 2019;5:131 –133.
18.Cappelli F, Morini S, Pieragnoli P, et al. Cardiac
resynchronization therapy for end-stage hypertrophiccardiomyopathy: the need for disease-speci ﬁc criteria.
J Am Coll Cardiol . 2018;71:464 –466.
19.Friedman PA, McClelland RL, Bamlet WR, et al.
Dual-chamber versus single-chamber detection en-
hancements for implantable de ﬁbrillator rhythm
diagnosis: the Detect Supraventricular TachycardiaStudy. Circulation . 2006;113:2871 –2879 .
20.Theuns DAMJ, Klootwijk APJ, Goedhart DM, et al.
Prevention of inappropriate therapy in implantablecardioverter-de ﬁbrillators: results of a prospective,
randomized study of tachyarrhythmia detection algo-rithms. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2004;44:2362 –2367 .
21.Kolb C, Sturmer M, Sick P, et al. Reduced risk for
inappropriate implantable cardioverter-de ﬁbrillator
shocks with dual-chamber therapy compared withsingle-chamber therapy: results of the randomizedOPTION study. J Am Coll Cardiol HF . 2014;2:611 –619.
22.Peterson PN, Greenlee RT, Go AS, et al. Compari-
son of inappropriate shocks and other health outcomesbetween single- and dual-chamber implantablecardioverter-de ﬁbrillators for primary prevention of
sudden cardiac death: results from the Cardiovascular
Research Network longitudinal study of implantablecardioverter-de ﬁbrillators. J Am Heart Assoc . 2017;6:
e006937 .
23.Defaye P, Boveda S, Klug D, et al. Dual- vs. single-
chamber de ﬁbrillators for primary prevention of sud-
den cardiac death: long-term follow-up of the Dé ﬁb-
rillateur Automatique Implantable-Prévention Primaire
registry. Europace . 2017;19:1478 –1484 .
24.Hu Z-Y, Zhang J, Xu Z-T, et al. Ef ﬁciencies and
complications of dual chamber versus single chamber
implantable cardioverter de ﬁbrillators in secondary
sudden cardiac death prevention: a meta-analysis.Heart Lung Circ . 2016;25:148 –154.
25.Maron BJ, Spirito P, Ackerman MJ, et al. Preven-
tion of sudden cardiac death with implantablecardioverter-de ﬁbrillators in children and adolescents
with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2013;61:1527 –1535 .
26.Bettin M, Larbig R, Rath B, et al. Long-term
experience with the subcutaneous implantable
cardioverter-de ﬁbrillator in teenagers and young
adults. J Am Coll Cardiol EP . 2017;3:1499 –1506 .
27.Pettit SJ, McLean A, Colquhoun I, et al. Clinical
experience of subcutaneous and transvenousimplantable cardioverter de ﬁbrillators in children and
teenagers. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol . 2013;36:1532 –
1538 .
28.Kumar KR, Mandleywala SN, Madias C, et al. Single
coil implantable cardioverter de ﬁbrillator leads in pa-
tients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Am J Cardiol .
2020;125:1896 –1900 .
29.Vamos M, Healey JS, Wang J, et al. Implantable
cardioverter-de ﬁbrillator therapy in hypertrophic car-
diomyopathy: a SIMPLE substudy. Heart Rhythm .
2018;15:386 –392.
30.Daubert J-C, Saxon L, Adamson PB, et al. 2012
EHRA/HRS expert consensus statement on cardiacresynchronization therapy in heart failure: implant andfollow-up recommendations and management. Euro-
pace . 2012;14:1236 –1286 .Ommen et al J A C CV O L .8 3 ,N O .2 3 ,2 0 2 4
2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –24052392

31.Heidenreich PA, Bozkurt B, Aguilar D, et al. 2022
AHA/ACC/HFSA guideline for the management ofheart failure: a report of the American College ofCardiology/American Heart Association Joint Commit-
tee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2022;79:e263 –e421 .
32.Kusumoto FM, Schoenfeld MH, Barrett C, et al.
2018 ACC/AHA/HRS Guideline on the evaluation andmanagement of patients with bradycardia and cardiacconduction delay: a report of the American College ofCardiology/American Heart Association Task Force onClinical Practice Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm So-
ciety. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;74:e51 –e156 .
8.1.1. Pharmacological Management of
Symptomatic Patients With Obstructive HCM
1.Cohen LS, Braunwald E. Amelioration of angina
pectoris in idiopathic hypertrophic subaortic stenosiswith beta-adrenergic blockade. Circulation . 1967;35:
847–851.
2.Adelman AG, Shah PM, Gramiak R, et al. Long-term
propranolol therapy in muscular subaortic stenosis. Br
Heart J . 1970;32:804 –811.
3.Stenson RE, Flamm MD Jr, Harrison DC, et al. Hy-
pertrophic subaortic stenosis. Clinical and hemody-
namic effects of long-term propranolol therapy. Am J
Cardiol . 1973;31:763 –773.
4.Bonow RO, Rosing DR, Bacharach SL, et al. Effects
of verapamil on left ventricular systolic function anddiastolic ﬁlling in patients with hypertrophic cardio-
myopathy. Circulation . 1981;64:787 –796.
5.Rosing DR, Kent KM, Maron BJ, et al. Verapamil
therapy: a new approach to the pharmacologic treat-ment of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. II. Effects on
exercise capacity and symptomatic status. Circulation .
1979;60:1208 –1213.
6.Toshima H, Koga Y, Nagata H, et al. Comparable
effects of oral diltiazem and verapamil in the treat-ment of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Double-blindcrossover study. Jpn Heart J . 1986;27:701 –715.
7.Sherrid MV, Barac I, McKenna WJ, et al. Multicenter
study of the ef ﬁcacy and safety of disopyramide in
obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2005;45:1251 –1258 .
8.Sherrid MV, Shetty A, Winson G, et al. Treatment of
obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy symptomsand gradient resistant to ﬁrst-line therapy with
b-
blockade or verapamil. Circ Heart Fail . 2013;6:694 –
702.
9.Adler A, Fourey D, Weissler-Snir A, et al. Safety of
outpatient initiation of disopyramide for obstructivehypertrophic cardiomyopathy patients. J Am Heart
Assoc . 2017;6:e005152 .
10.Maron BJ, Dearani JA, Ommen SR, et al. Low
operative mortality achieved with surgical septalmyectomy: role of dedicated hypertrophic cardiomy-opathy centers in the management of dynamic sub-aortic obstruction. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2015;66:1307 –
1308 .
11.Maron MS, Olivotto I, Zenovich AG, et al. Hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathy is predominantly a disease of
left ventricular out ﬂow tract obstruction. Circulation .
2006;114:2232 –2239 .
12.Ommen SR, Maron BJ, Olivotto I, et al. Long-term
effects of surgical septal myectomy on survival inpatients with obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopa-
thy. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2005;46:470 –476.
13.Desai MY, Owens A, Geske JB, et al. Myosin inhi-
bition in patients with obstructive hypertrophic car-diomyopathy referred for septal reduction therapy.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2022;80:95 –108.
14.Olivotto I, Oreziak A, Barriales-Villa R, et al.
Mavacamten for treatment of symptomatic obstructive
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (EXPLORER-HCM): arandomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase3 trial. Lancet . 2020;396:759 –769.
15.Braunwald E, Ebert PA. Hemogynamic alterations
in idiopathic hypertrophic subaortic stenosis induced
by sympathomimetic drugs. Am J Cardiol . 1962;10:
489 –495.
16.Kirk CR, Gibbs JL, Thomas R, et al. Cardiovascular
collapse after verapamil in supraventricular tachy-
cardia. Arch Dis Child . 1987;62:1265 –1266 .
17.CAMZYOS [package insert] . Bristol-Myers Squibb
Company; 2022. Accessed September 14, 2022.https://packageinserts.bms.com/pi/pi_camzyos.pdf
18.Moran AM, Colan SD. Verapamil therapy in infants
with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Cardiol Young .
1998;8:310 –319.
8.1.2. Invasive Treatment of Symptomatic
Patients With Obstructive HCM
1.Maron BJ, Dearani JA, Ommen SR, et al. Low oper-
ative mortality achieved with surgical septal myec-tomy: role of dedicated hypertrophic cardiomyopathycenters in the management of dynamic subaorticobstruction. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2015;66:1307 –1308
.
2.Maron MS, Olivotto I, Zenovich AG, et al. Hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathy is predominantly a disease ofleft ventricular out ﬂow tract obstruction. Circulation .
2006;114:2232 –2239 .
3.Ommen SR, Maron BJ, Olivotto I, et al. Long-term
effects of surgical septal myectomy on survival inpatients with obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopa-thy. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2005;46:470 –476.
4.Rowin EJ, Maron BJ, Lesser JR, et al. Papillary
muscle insertion directly into the anterior mitral lea ﬂet
in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, its identi ﬁcation and
cause of out ﬂow obstruction by cardiac magnetic
resonance imaging, and its surgical management. Am J
Cardiol . 2013;111:1677 –1679 .
5.Teo EP, Teoh JG, Hung J. Mitral valve and papillary
muscle abnormalities in hypertrophic obstructive car-diomyopathy. Curr Opin Cardiol . 2015;30:475 –482.
6.Di Tommaso L, Stassano P, Mannacio V, et al.
Asymmetric septal hypertrophy in patients with severeaortic stenosis: the usefulness of associated septalmyectomy. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2013;145:171 –
175.
7.Kayalar N, Schaff HV, Daly RC, et al. Concomitant
septal myectomy at the time of aortic valve replace-ment for severe aortic stenosis. Ann Thorac Surg .
2010;89:459 –464.
8.Batzner A, Pfeiffer B, Neugebauer A, et al. Survival
after alcohol septal ablation in patients with hyper-trophic obstructive cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2018;72:3087 –3094 .
9.Nguyen A, Schaff HV, Hang D, et al. Surgical
myectomy versus alcohol septal ablation for obstruc-
tive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a propensity score-matched cohort. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2019;157:
306 –315.e303 .
10.Kimmelstiel C, Zisa DC, Kuttab JS, et al. Guideline-
based referral for septal reduction therapy inobstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is associated
with excellent clinical outcomes. Circ Cardiovasc Interv .
2019;12:e007673 .
11.Mitra A, Ghosh RK, Bandyopadhyay D, et al. Sig-
niﬁcance of pulmonary hypertension in hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy. Curr Probl Cardiol . 2020;45:100398 .
12.
Ong KC, Geske JB, Hebl VB, et al. Pulmonary hy-
pertension is associated with worse survival in hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathy. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc
Imaging . 2016;17:604 –610.
13.Desai MY, Bhonsale A, Patel P, et al. Exercise
echocardiography in asymptomatic HCM: exercise ca-pacity, and not LV out ﬂow tract gradient predicts
long-term outcomes. J Am Coll Cardiol Img . 2014;7:
26–36.
14.Nguyen A, Schaff HV, Nishimura RA, et al. De-
terminants of reverse remodeling of the left atrium
after transaortic myectomy. Ann Thorac Surg .
2018;106:447 –453.
15.Finocchiaro G, Haddad F, Kobayashi Y, et al. Impact
of septal reduction on left atrial size and diastole inhypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Echocardiography .
2016;33:686 –694.
16.Blackshear JL, Kusumoto H, Safford RE, et al.
Usefulness of von Willebrand factor activity indexes topredict therapeutic response in hypertrophic cardio-myopathy. Am J Cardiol . 2016;117:436 –442.
17.Blackshear JL, Stark ME, Agnew RC, et al. Remis-
sion of recurrent gastrointestinal bleeding after septalreduction therapy in patients with hypertrophic
obstructive cardiomyopathy-associated acquired von
Willebrand syndrome. J Thromb Haemost . 2015;13:191 –
196.
18.Desai MY, Smedira NG, Dhillon A, et al. Prediction
of sudden death risk in obstructive hypertrophic car-diomyopathy: potential for re ﬁnement of current
criteria. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2018;156:750 –759.
e3.
19.McLeod CJ, Ommen SR, Ackerman MJ, et al. Sur-
gical septal myectomy decreases the risk for appro-priate implantable cardioverter de ﬁbrillator discharge
in obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Eur Heart
J. 2007;28:2583 –2588 .
20.Otto CM, Nishimura RA, Bonow RO, et al. 2020
ACC/AHA guideline for the management of patients
with valvular heart disease: a report of the AmericanCollege of Cardiology/American Heart AssociationJoint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2021;77:e25 –e197 .
21.Sorajja P, Nishimura RA, Gersh BJ, et al. Outcome
of mildly symptomatic or asymptomatic obstructive
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a long-term follow-up
study. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2009;54:234 –241
.
22.Ball W, Ivanov J, Rakowski H, et al. Long-term
survival in patients with resting obstructive hypertro-phic cardiomyopathy comparison of conservativeversus invasive treatment. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2011;58:
2313 –2321 .
23.Kim LK, Swaminathan RV, Looser P, et al. Hospital
volume outcomes after septal myectomy and alcohol
septal ablation for treatment of obstructiveJACC VOL. 83, NO. 23, 2024 Ommen et al
JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –2405 2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline2393

hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: US nationwide inpatient
database, 2003-2011. JAMA Cardiol . 2016;1:324 –332.
24.Hodges K, Rivas CG, Aguilera J, et al. Surgical
management of left ventricular out ﬂow tract
obstruction in a specialized hypertrophic obstructive
cardiomyopathy center. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg .
2019;157:2289 –2299 .
25.Cui H, Schaff HV, Nishimura RA, et al. Conduction
abnormalities and long-term mortality following
septal myectomy in patients with obstructive hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;74:
645 –655.
26.Holst KA, Hanson KT, Ommen SR, et al. Septal
myectomy in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: nationaloutcomes of concomitant mitral surgery. Mayo Clin
Proc. 2019;94:66 –73.
27.Hong JH, Schaff HV, Nishimura RA, et al. Mitral
regurgitation in patients with hypertrophic obstructivecardiomyopathy: implications for concomitant valveprocedures. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2016;68:1497 –1504 .
28.Holst KA, Schaff HV, Smedira NG, et al. Impact of
hospital volume on outcomes of septal myectomy for
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Ann Thorac Surg .
2022;114:2131 –2138 .
29.Nguyen A, Schaff HV. Surgical myectomy: sub-
aortic, midventricular, and apical. Cardiol Clin .
2019;37:95 –104.
30.Hang D, Schaff HV, Ommen SR, et al. Combined
transaortic and transapical approach to septal myec-tomy in patients with complex hypertrophic cardio-myopathy. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2018;155:2096 –
2102 .
31.Kunkala MR, Schaff HV, Nishimura RA, et al.
Transapical approach to myectomy for midventricularobstruction in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Ann
Thorac Surg . 2013;96:564 –570.
32.Nguyen A, Schaff HV, Nishimura RA, et al. Does
septal thickness in ﬂuence outcome of myectomy for
hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy? Eur J Car-
diothorac Surg . 2018;53:582 –589.
33.Balaram SK, Ross RE, Sherrid MV, et al. Role of
mitral valve plication in the surgical management ofhypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Ann Thorac Surg .
2012;94:1990 –1997 .
34.Rastegar H, Boll G, Rowin EJ, et al. Results of
surgical septal myectomy for obstructive hypertrophiccardiomyopathy: the Tufts experience. Ann Car-
diothorac Surg . 2017;6:353 –363.
35.Vriesendorp PA, Schinkel AF, Soliman OI, et al.
Long-term bene ﬁt of myectomy and anterior mitral
leaﬂet extension in obstructive hypertrophic cardio-
myopathy. Am J Cardiol . 2015;115:670 –675.
36.Ferrazzi P, Spirito P, Iacovoni A, et al. Transaortic
chordal cutting mitral valve repair for obstructive hy-
pertrophic cardiomyopathy with mild septal hyper-
trophy. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2015;66:1687 –1696 .
37.Minakata K, Dearani JA, Nishimura RA, et al.
Extended septal myectomy for hypertrophic obstruc-tive cardiomyopathy with anomalous mitral papillarymuscles or chordae. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg .
2004;127:481 –489.
38.Kaple RK, Murphy RT, DiPaola LM, et al. Mitral
valve abnormalities in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy:echocardiographic features and surgical outcomes.
Ann Thorac Surg . 2008;85:1527 –1535 .
39.Schoendube FA, Klues HG, Reith S, et al. Long-
term clinical and echocardiographic follow-up aftersurgical correction of hypertrophic obstructive car-diomyopathy with extended myectomy and recon-
struction of the subvalvular mitral apparatus.
Circulation . 1995;92:II122 –II127 .
40.Hang D, Schaff HV, Nishimura RA, et al. Accuracy
of jet direction on Doppler echocardiography in iden-tifying the etiology of mitral regurgitation in obstruc-tive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Am Soc
Echocardiogr . 2019;32:333 –340.
41.Deb SJ, Schaff HV, Dearani JA, et al. Septal
myectomy results in regression of left ventricular hy-pertrophy in patients with hypertrophic obstructive
cardiomyopathy. Ann Thorac Surg . 2004;78:2118 –2122 .
42.Cho YH, Quintana E, Schaff HV, et al. Residual and
recurrent gradients after septal myectomy for hyper-trophic cardiomyopathy —mechanisms of obstruction
and outcomes of reoperation. J Thorac Cardiovasc
Surg. 2014;148:909 –915.
43.Smedira NG, Lytle BW, Lever HM, et al. Current
effectiveness and risks of isolated septal myectomy forhypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy. Ann Thorac
Surg. 2008;85:127 –
133.
44.Ralph-Edwards A, Woo A, McCrindle BW, et al.
Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy: comparison
of outcomes after myectomy or alcohol ablationadjusted by propensity score. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg .
2005;129:351 –358.
45.Kwon DH, Setser RM, Thamilarasan M, et al.
Abnormal papillary muscle morphology is indepen-dently associated with increased left ventricularoutﬂow tract obstruction in hypertrophic cardiomy-
opathy. Heart . 2008;94:1295 –1301 .
46.Sorajja P, Binder J, Nishimura RA, et al. Predictors
of an optimal clinical outcome with alcohol septal
ablation for obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.Catheter Cardiovasc Interv . 2013;81:E58 –E67.
47.Agarwal S, Tuzcu EM, Desai MY, et al. Updated
meta-analysis of septal alcohol ablation versus myec-tomy for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2010;55:823 –834.
48.Singh K, Qutub M, Carson K, et al. A meta analysis
of current status of alcohol septal ablation and surgical
myectomy for obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopa-
thy. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv . 2016;88:107 –115.
49.Laredo M, Khraiche D, Raisky O, et al. Long-term
results of the modi ﬁed Konno procedure in high-risk
children with obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopa-thy. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2018;156:2285 –2294.
e2.
50.Chen MS, McCarthy PM, Lever HM, et al. Effec-
tiveness of atrial ﬁbrillation surgery in patients with
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Am J Cardiol . 2004;93:
373–375.
51.Rowin EJ, Hausvater A, Link MS, et al. Clinical
proﬁle and consequences of atrial ﬁbrillation in hy-
pertrophic cardiomyopathy. Circulation . 2017;136:
2420 –2436 .
52.Geske JB, Konecny T, Ommen SR, et al. Surgical
myectomy improves pulmonary hypertension inobstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Eur Heart J .
2014;35:2032 –2039 .53.Woo A, Williams WG, Choi R, et al. Clinical and
echocardiographic determinants of long-term survivalafter surgical myectomy in obstructive hypertrophiccardiomyopathy. Circulation
. 2005;111:2033 –2041 .
54.Rowin EJ, Cooper C, Carrick RT, et al. Ventricular
septal myectomy decreases long-term risk for atrialﬁbrillation in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyop-
athy. Am J Cardiol . 2022;179:70 –73.
55.Osman M, Kheiri B, Osman K, et al. Alcohol septal
ablation vs myectomy for symptomatic hypertrophic
obstructive cardiomyopathy: systematic review and
meta-analysis. Clin Cardiol . 2019;42:190 –197.
56.Vriesendorp PA, Liebregts M, Steggerda RC, et al.
Long-term outcomes after medical and invasive
treatment in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyop-athy. J Am Coll Cardiol HF . 2014;2:630 –636.
57.Liebregts M, Vriesendorp PA, Mahmoodi BK, et al.
A systematic review and meta-analysis of long-termoutcomes after septal reduction therapy in patientswith hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll Cardiol
HF. 2015;3:896 –905.
58.Li P, Xue Y, Sun J, et al. Outcome of alcohol septal
ablation in mildly symptomatic patients with hyper-trophic obstructive cardiomyopathy: a comparisonwith medical therapy. Clin Cardiol . 2021;44:1409 –
1415.
8.2. Management of Patients With
Nonobstructive HCM With Preserved EF
1.Bourmayan C, Razavi A, Fournier C, et al. Effect of
propranolol on left ventricular relaxation in hypertro-
phic cardiomyopathy: an echographic study. Am Heart
J. 1985;109:1311 –1316.
2.Wilmshurst PT, Thompson DS, Juul SM, et al. Effects
of verapamil on haemodynamic function and myocar-dial metabolism in patients with hypertrophic cardio-myopathy. Br Heart J . 1986;56:544 –553.
3.Udelson JE, Bonow RO, O ’Gara PT, et al. Verapamil
prevents silent myocardial perfusion abnormalitiesduring exercise in asymptomatic patients with hyper-trophic cardiomyopathy. Circulation . 1989;79:1052 –
1060 .
4.Toshima H, Koga Y, Nagata H, et al. Comparable
effects of oral diltiazem and verapamil in the treat-ment of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Double-blindcrossover study. Jpn Heart J . 1986;27:701 –715.
5.Sugihara H, Taniguchi Y, Ito K, et al. Effects of dil-
tiazem on myocardial perfusion abnormalities duringexercise in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Ann Nucl Med . 1998;12:349 –354.
6.Axelsson A, Iversen K, Vejlstrup N, et al. Ef ﬁcacy
and safety of the angiotensin II receptor blocker los-
artan for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: the INHERITrandomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol . 2015;3:123 –131.
7.Nguyen A, Schaff HV, Nishimura RA, et al. Apical
myectomy for patients with hypertrophic cardiomy-opathy and advanced heart failure. J Thorac Cardiovasc
Surg. 2019;S0022-5223(0019)30772-X .
8.Ho CY, Day SM, Axelsson A, et al. Valsartan in early-
stage hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a randomizedphase 2 trial. Nat Med . 2021;27:1818 –1824 .
9.Ho CY, Day SM, Ashley EA, et al. Genotype and
lifetime burden of disease in hypertrophicOmmen et al J A C CV O L .8 3 ,N O .2 3 ,2 0 2 4
2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –24052394

cardiomyopathy: insights from the Sarcomeric Human
Cardiomyopathy Registry (SHaRE). Circulation .
2018;138:1387 –1398 .
10.Pelliccia F, Pasceri V, Limongelli G, et al. Long-
term outcome of nonobstructive versus obstructive
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Int J Cardiol . 2017;243:379 –384.
11.Webber SA, Lipshultz SE, Sleeper LA, et al. Out-
comes of restrictive cardiomyopathy in childhood andthe in ﬂuence of phenotype: a report from the Pediatric
Cardiomyopathy Registry. Circulation . 2012;126:1237 –
1244 .
12.Sorajja P, Ommen SR, Nishimura RA, et al. Adverse
prognosis of patients with hypertrophic cardiomyop-
athy who have epicardial coronary artery disease. Cir-
culation . 2003;108:2342 –2348 .
13.Gilligan DM, Chan WL, Joshi J, et al. A double-
blind, placebo-controlled crossover trial of nadololand verapamil in mild and moderately symptomatichypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll Cardiol .
1993;21:1672 –1679 .
14.Spoladore R, Maron MS, D ’Amato R, et al. Phar-
macological treatment options for hypertrophic car-
diomyopathy: high time for evidence. Eur Heart J .
2012;33:1724 –1733.
15.Spicer RL, Rocchini AP, Crowley DC, et al. Hemo-
dynamic effects of verapamil in children and adoles-cents with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Circulation .
1983;67:413 –420.
8.3. Management of Patients With HCM and
Advanced HF
1.Heidenreich PA, Bozkurt B, Aguilar D, et al. 2022
AHA/ACC/HFSA guideline for the management of
heart failure: a report of the American College ofCardiology/American Heart Association Joint Commit-tee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2022;79:e263 –e421 .
2.Harris KM, Spirito P, Maron MS, et al. Prevalence,
clinical pro ﬁle, and signi ﬁcance of left ventricular
remodeling in the end-stage phase of hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy. Circulation . 2006;114:216 –225.
3.Hebl VB, Miranda WR, Ong KC, et al. The natural
history of nonobstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopa-thy. Mayo Clin Proc . 2016;91:279 –
287.
4.Melacini P, Basso C, Angelini A, et al. Clinicopath-
ological pro ﬁles of progressive heart failure in hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathy. Eur Heart J . 2010;31:2111 –
2123 .
5.Rowin EJ, Maron MS, Chan RH, et al. Interaction of
adverse disease related pathways in hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy. Am J Cardiol . 2017;120:2256 –2264 .
6.Coats CJ, Rantell K, Bartnik A, et al. Cardiopulmo-
nary exercise testing and prognosis in hypertrophiccardiomyopathy. Circ Heart Fail . 2015;8:1022 –1031 .
7.Magri D, Re F, Limongelli G, et al. Heart failure
progression in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy —possible
insights from cardiopulmonary exercise testing. Circ J .
2016;80:2204 –2211.
8.Kato TS, Takayama H, Yoshizawa S, et al. Cardiac
transplantation in patients with hypertrophic cardio-
myopathy. Am J Cardiol . 2012;110:568 –574.
9.Lee MS, Zimmer R, Kobashigawa J. Long-term
outcomes of orthotopic heart transplantation forhypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Transplant Proc .
2014;46:1502 –1505 .
10.Rowin EJ, Maron BJ, Kiernan MS, et al. Advanced
heart failure with preserved systolic function in non-obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: under-recognized subset of candidates for heart transplant.
Circ Heart Fail . 2014;7:967 –975.
11.Mehra MR, Canter CE, Hannan MM, et al. The 2016
International Society for Heart Lung Transplantationlisting criteria for heart transplantation: a 10-yearupdate. J Heart Lung Transplant . 2016;35:1 –23.
12.Rowin EJ, Maron BJ, Abt P, et al. Impact of
advanced therapies for improving survival to hearttransplant in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyop-athy. Am J Cardiol . 2018;121:986 –996.
13.Fowler CC, Helmers MR, Smood B, et al. The
modiﬁed US heart allocation system improves trans-
plant rates and decreases status upgrade utilization for
patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Heart
Lung Transplant . 2021;40:1181 –1190 .
14.Olivotto I, Oreziak A, Barriales-Villa R, et al.
Mavacamten for treatment of symptomatic obstructive
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (EXPLORER-HCM): arandomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase3 trial. Lancet . 2020;396:759 –769.
15.Topilsky Y, Pereira NL, Shah DK, et al. Left ven-
tricular assist device therapy in patients with restric-
tive and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Circ Heart Fail .
2011;4:266 –275.
16.Muthiah K, Phan J, Robson D, et al. Centrifugal
continuous- ﬂow left ventricular assist device in pa-
tients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a case series.ASAIO J . 2013;59:183 –187.
17.Grupper A, Park SJ, Pereira NL, et al. Role of ven-
tricular assist therapy for patients with heart failureand restrictive physiology: improving outcomes for alethal disease. J Heart Lung Transplant . 2015;34:1042 –
1049 .
18.Patel SR, Saeed O, Naftel D, et al. Outcomes of
restrictive and hypertrophic cardiomyopathies afterLVAD: an INTERMACS analysis. J Card Fail . 2017;23:
859 –867.
19.Yagi N, Seguchi O, Mochizuki H, et al. Implantation
of ventricular assist devices in hypertrophic cardio-myopathy with left ventricular systolic dysfunction.ESC Heart Fail . 2021;8:5513 –5522 .
20.Rowin EJ, Maron BJ, Carrick RT, et al. Outcomes in
patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and left
ventricular systolic dysfunction. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2020;75:3033 –3043 .
21.Rogers DP, Marazia S, Chow AW, et al. Effect of
biventricular pacing on symptoms and cardiacremodelling in patients with end-stage hypertrophiccardiomyopathy. Eur J Heart Fail . 2008;10:507 –
513.
22.Gu M, Jin H, Hua W, et al. Clinical outcome of
cardiac resynchronization therapy in dilated-phase
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Geriatr Cardiol .
2017;14:238 –244.
23.Cappelli F, Morini S, Pieragnoli P, et al. Cardiac
resynchronization therapy for end-stage hypertrophiccardiomyopathy: the need for disease-speci ﬁc criteria.
J Am Coll Cardiol . 2018;71:464 –466.
24.Killu AM, Park JY, Sara JD, et al. Cardiac resynch-
ronization therapy in patients with end-stage hyper-trophic cardiomyopathy. Europace . 2018;20:82 –88.25.Rowin EJ, Mohanty S, Madias C, et al. Bene ﬁto f
cardiac resynchronization therapy in end-stage non-
obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll
Cardiol EP . 2019;5:131 –133.
26.Biagini E, Coccolo F, Ferlito M, et al. Dilated-
hypokinetic evolution of hypertrophic cardiomyopa-
thy: prevalence, incidence, risk factors, and prognostic
implications in pediatric and adult patients. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2005;46:1543 –1550 .
27.Ismail TF, Jabbour A, Gulati A, et al. Role of late
gadolinium enhancement cardiovascular magneticresonance in the risk strati ﬁcation of hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy. Heart . 2014;100:1851 –1858 .
28.Marstrand P, Han L, Day SM, et al. Hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy with left ventricular systolicdysfunction: insights from the SHaRe Registry. Circu-
lation . 2020;141:1371 –1383 .
29.Wasserstrum Y, Larranaga-Moreira JM, Martinez-
Veira C, et al. Hypokinetic hypertrophic cardiomyopa-thy: clinical phenotype, genetics, and prognosis. ESC
Heart Fail . 2022;9:2301 –2312 .
30.Pasqualucci D, Fornaro A, Castelli G, et al. Clinical
spectrum, therapeutic options, and outcome ofadvanced heart failure in hypertrophic cardiomyopa-thy. Circ Heart Fail . 2015;8:1014 –1021 .
31.Axelsson A, Iversen K, Vejlstrup N, et al. Ef ﬁcacy
and safety of the angiotensin II receptor blocker los-
artan for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: the INHERIT
randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol . 2015;3:123 –131.
32.Maron MS, Chan RH, Kapur NK, et al. Effect of
spironolactone on myocardial ﬁbrosis and other clinical
variables in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopa-thy. Am J Med . 2018;131:837 –841.
33.Hamada T, Kubo T, Kitaoka H, et al. Clinical fea-
tures of the dilated phase of hypertrophic cardiomy-opathy in comparison with those of dilated
cardiomyopathy. Clin Cardiol . 2010;33:E24 –E28.
34.Cheng S, Choe YH, Ota H, et al. CMR assessment
and clinical outcomes of hypertrophic cardiomyopathywith or without ventricular remodeling in the end-stage phase. Int J Cardiovasc Imaging . 2018;34:597 –
605.
35.Burke MA, Chang S, Wakimoto H, et al. Molecular
proﬁling of dilated cardiomyopathy that progresses to
heart failure. JCI Insight
. 2016;1:e86898 .
36.Chafﬁn M, Papangeli I, Simonson B, et al. Single-
nucleus pro ﬁling of human dilated and hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy. Nature . 2022;608:174 –180.
37.Maron MS, Kalsmith BM, Udelson JE, et al. Survival
after cardiac transplantation in patients with hyper-trophic cardiomyopathy. Circ Heart Fail . 2010;3:574 –
579.
38.Zuñiga Cisneros J, Stehlik J, Selzman CH, et al.
Outcomes in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyop-athy awaiting heart transplantation. Circ Heart Fail .
2018;11:e004378 .
39.Sridharan L, Wayda B, Truby LK, et al. Mechanical
circulatory support device utilization and heart trans-
plant waitlist outcomes in patients with restrictive and
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Circ Heart Fail . 2018;11:
e004665 .
40.Singh TP, Almond CS, Piercey G, et al. Current
outcomes in US children with cardiomyopathy listedfor heart transplantation. Circ Heart Fail . 2012;5:594 –
601.JACC VOL. 83, NO. 23, 2024 Ommen et al
JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –2405 2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline2395

41.CAMZYOS [package insert] . Bristol-Myers Squibb
Company; 2022. Accessed September 14, 2022.https://packageinserts.bms.com/pi/pi_camzyos.pdf
42.Su JA, Menteer J. Outcomes of Berlin Heart
EXCOR((R)) pediatric ventricular assist device supportin patients with restrictive and hypertrophic cardio-
myopathy. Pediatr Transplant . 2017;21:e13048 .
43.Bristow MR, Feldman AM, Saxon LA. Heart failure
management using implantable devices for ventricularresynchronization: Comparison of Medical Therapy,Pacing, and De ﬁbrillation in Chronic Heart Failure
(COMPANION) trial. J Card Fail . 2000;6:276 –285.
44.Tang AS, Wells GA, Arnold M, et al. Resynchroni-
zation/de ﬁbrillation for ambulatory heart failure trial:
rationale and trial design. Curr Opin Cardiol . 2009;24:
1–8.
45.Cleland JG, Daubert JC, Erdmann E, et al. The effect
of cardiac resynchronization on morbidity and mortality
in heart failure. N Engl J Med . 2005;352:1539 –1549 .
46.Moss AJ, Hall WJ, Cannom DS, et al. Cardiac-
resynchronization therapy for the prevention of heart-failure events. N Engl J Med . 2009;361:1329 –1338 .
8.4. Management of Patients With HCM and AF
1.Guttmann OP, Rahman MS, O ’Mahony C, et al. Atrial
ﬁbrillation and thromboembolism in patients with hy-
pertrophic cardiomyopathy: systematic review. Heart .
2014;100:465 –472.
2.Maron BJ, Olivotto I, Bellone P, et al. Clinical pro ﬁle
of stroke in 900 patients with hypertrophic cardio-myopathy. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2002;39:301 –307.
3.Jung H, Yang P-S, Jang E, et al. Effectiveness and
safety of non-vitamin K antagonist oral anticoagulantsin patients with atrial ﬁbrillation with hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy: a nationwide cohort study. Chest .
2019;155:354 –363.
4.Noseworthy PA, Yao X, Shah ND, et al. Stroke and
bleeding risks in NOAC- and warfarin-treated patients
with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and atrial ﬁbrilla-
tion. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2016;67:3020 –3021 .
5.Dominguez F, Climent V, Zorio E, et al. Direct oral
anticoagulants in patients with hypertrophic cardio-
myopathy and atrial ﬁbrillation. Int J Cardiol .
2017;248:232 –238.
6.van Velzen HG, Theuns DAMJ, Yap S-C, et al. Inci-
dence of device-detected atrial ﬁbrillation and long-
term outcomes in patients with hypertrophic cardio-myopathy. Am J Cardiol . 2017;119:100 –105.
7.Wilke I, Witzel K, Münch J, et al. High incidence of
de novo and subclinical atrial ﬁbrillation in patients
with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and cardiac rhythmmanagement device. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol .
2016;27:779 –784.
8.Mahajan R, Perera T, Elliott AD, et al. Subclinical
device-detected atrial ﬁbrillation and stroke risk: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur Heart J .
2018;39:1407 –1415.
9.Rowin EJ, Hausvater A, Link MS, et al. Clinical pro ﬁle
and consequences of atrial ﬁbrillation in hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy. Circulation . 2017;136:2420 –2436 .
10.Olivotto I, Cecchi F, Casey SA, et al. Impact of
atrial ﬁbrillation on the clinical course of hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathy. Circulation . 2001;104:
2517 –2524 .11.Boriani G, Glotzer TV, Santini M, et al. Device-
detected atrial ﬁbrillation and risk for stroke: an
analysis of >10,000 patients from the SOS AF project
(Stroke preventiOn Strategies based on Atrial Fibrilla-
tion information from implanted devices). Eur Heart J .
2014;35:508 –516.
12.Zhao D-S, Shen Y, Zhang Q, et al. Outcomes of
catheter ablation of atrial ﬁbrillation in patients with
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a systematic review andmeta-analysis. Europace . 2016;18:508 –520.
13.Bassiouny M, Lindsay BD, Lever H, et al. Outcomes
of nonpharmacologic treatment of atrial ﬁ
brillation in
patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Heart
Rhythm . 2015;12:1438 –1447 .
14.Page RL, Joglar JA, Caldwell MA, et al. 2015 ACC/
AHA/HRS guideline for the management of adult pa-
tients with supraventricular tachycardia: a report ofthe American College of Cardiology/American HeartAssociation Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelinesand the Heart Rhythm Society. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2016;67:e27 –e115.
15.Van Gelder IC, Healey JS, Crijns HJGM, et al.
Duration of device-detected subclinical atrial ﬁbrilla-
tion and occurrence of stroke in ASSERT. Eur Heart J .
2017;38:1339 –1344 .
16.Gorenek B, Bax J, Boriani G, et al. Device-detected
subclinical atrial tachyarrhythmias: de ﬁnition, impli-
cations and management —an European Heart Rhythm
Association (EHRA) consensus document. Europace .
2017;19:1556 –1578 .
17.Swiryn S, Orlov MV, Benditt DG, et al. Clinical im-
plications of brief device-detected atrial tachyar-rhythmias in a cardiac rhythm management device
population: results from the Registry of Atrial Tachy-
cardia and Atrial Fibrillation Episodes. Circulation .
2016;134:1130 –1140 .
18.Healey JS, Connolly SJ, Gold MR, et al. Subclinical
atrial ﬁbrillation and the risk of stroke. N Engl J Med .
2012;366:120 –129.
19.Botto GL, Padeletti L, Santini M, et al. Presence
and duration of atrial ﬁbrillation detected by contin-
uous monitoring: crucial implications for the risk ofthromboembolic events. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol .
2009;20:241 –248.
20.Robinson K, Frenneaux MP, Stockins B, et al. Atrial
ﬁbrillation in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a longi-
tudinal study. J Am Coll Cardiol . 1990;15:1279 –1285 .
21.Sherrid MV, Barac I, McKenna WJ, et al. Multicenter
study of the ef ﬁcacy and safety of disopyramide in
obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2005;45:1251 –1258 .
22.Adler A, Fourey D, Weissler-Snir A, et al. Safety of
outpatient initiation of disopyramide for obstructivehypertrophic cardiomyopathy patients. J Am Heart
Assoc . 2017;6:e005152 .
23.Moore JC, Trager L, Anzia LE, et al. Dofetilide for
suppression of atrial ﬁbrillation in hypertrophic car-
diomyopathy: a case series and literature review.Pacing Clin Electrophysiol . 2018;41:396 –401.
24.Miller CAS, Maron MS, Estes NAM III, et al. Safety,
side effects and relative ef ﬁcacy of medications for
rhythm control of atrial ﬁbrillation in hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy. Am J Cardiol . 2019;123:1859 –1862 .
25.Providencia R, Elliott P, Patel K, et al. Catheter
ablation for atrial ﬁbrillation in hypertrophiccardiomyopathy: a systematic review and meta-anal-
ysis. Heart . 2016;102:1533 –1543 .
26.Santangeli P, Di Biase L, Themistoclakis S, et al.
Catheter ablation of atrial ﬁbrillation in hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy: long-term outcomes and mecha-
nisms of arrhythmia recurrence. Circ Arrhythm Elec-
trophysiol . 2013;6:1089 –1094 .
27.Chen MS, McCarthy PM, Lever HM, et al. Effec-
tiveness of atrial ﬁbrillation surgery in patients with
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Am J Cardiol . 2004;93:
373–375.
28.Bogachev-Prokophiev AV, Afanasyev AV,
Zheleznev SI, et al. Concomitant ablation foratrial ﬁbrillation during septal myectomy in
patients with hypertrophic obstructive cardiomy-
opathy. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2018;155:1536 –
1542.e2 .
29.Lapenna E, Pozzoli A, De Bonis M, et al. Mid-term
outcomes of concomitant surgical ablation of atrialﬁbrillation in patients undergoing cardiac surgery for
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg .
2017;51:1112 –1118.
30.Guttmann OP, Pavlou M, O ’Mahony C, et al. Pre-
diction of thrombo-embolic risk in patients with hy-
pertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM Risk-CVA). Eur J
Heart Fail . 2015;17:837 –
845.
31.Valdés SO, Miyake CY, Niu MC, et al. Early experi-
ence with intravenous sotalol in children with andwithout congenital heart disease. Heart Rhythm .
2018;15:1862 –1869 .
32.Tanel RE, Walsh EP, Lulu JA, et al. Sotalol for re-
fractory arrhythmias in pediatric and young adult pa-
tients: initial ef ﬁcacy and long-term outcome. Am
Heart J . 1995;130:791 –797.
8.5. Management of Patients With HCM and
Ventricular Arrhythmias
1.Rowin EJ, Maron BJ, Abt P, et al. Impact of advanced
therapies for improving survival to heart transplant inpatients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Am J
Cardiol . 2018;121:986 –996.
2.Rowin EJ, Maron BJ, Kiernan MS, et al. Advanced
heart failure with preserved systolic function in non-obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: under-
recognized subset of candidates for heart transplant.
Circ Heart Fail . 2014;7:967 –975.
3.Connolly SJ, Dorian P, Roberts RS, et al. Com-
parison of beta-blockers, amiodarone plus beta-blockers, or sotalol for prevention of shocksfrom implantable cardioverter de ﬁbrillators: the
OPTIC study: a randomized trial. JAMA . 2006;295:
165–171.
4.Santangeli P, Muser D, Maeda S, et al. Comparative
effectiveness of antiarrhythmic drugs and catheterablation for the prevention of recurrent ventriculartachycardia in patients with implantable cardioverter-
deﬁbrillators: a systematic review and meta-analysis
of randomized controlled trials. Heart Rhythm .
2016;13:1552 –1559 .
5.Baquero GA, Banchs JE, Depalma S, et al. Dofetilide
reduces the frequency of ventricular arrhythmias and
implantable cardioverter de ﬁbrillator therapies.
J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol . 2012;23:296 –301.
6.Gao D, Van Herendael H, Alshengeiti L, et al. Mex-
iletine as an adjunctive therapy to amiodarone reducesOmmen et al J A C CV O L .8 3 ,N O .2 3 ,2 0 2 4
2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –24052396

the frequency of ventricular tachyarrhythmia events in
patients with an implantable de ﬁbrillator. J Cardiovasc
Pharmacol . 2013;62:199 –204.
7.Link MS, Bockstall K, Weinstock J, et al. Ventricular
tachyarrhythmias in patients with hypertrophic car-diomyopathy and de ﬁbrillators: triggers, treatment,
and implications. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol . 2017;28:
531–537.
8.Wilkoff BL, Fauchier L, Stiles MK, et al. 2015 HRS/
EHRA/APHRS/SOLAECE expert consensus statementon optimal implantable cardioverter-de ﬁbrillator pro-
gramming and testing. J Arrhythm . 2016;32:1 –28.
9.Santangeli P, Di Biase L, Lakkireddy D, et al. Radio-
frequency catheter ablation of ventricular arrhythmiasin patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: safety
and feasibility. Heart Rhythm . 2010;7:1036 –1042 .
10.Igarashi M, Nogami A, Kurosaki K, et al. Radio-
frequency catheter ablation of ventricular tachycardiain patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and
apical aneurysm. J Am Coll Cardiol EP . 2018;4:339 –350.
11.Dukkipati SR, d ’Avila A, Soejima K, et al. Long-term
outcomes of combined epicardial and endocardialablation of monomorphic ventricular tachycardia
related to hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Circ Arrhythm
Electrophysiol . 2011;4:185 –194.
12.Borne RT, Varosy PD, Masoudi FA. Implantable
cardioverter-de ﬁbrillator shocks: epidemiology, out-
comes, and therapeutic approaches. JAMA Intern Med .
2013;173:859 –865.
13.Mehra MR, Canter CE, Hannan MM, et al. The 2016
International Society for Heart Lung Transplantation
listing criteria for heart transplantation: a 10-yearupdate. J Heart Lung Transplant . 2016;35:1 –23.
14.Echt DS, Liebson PR, Mitchell LB, et al. Mortality
and morbidity in patients receiving encainide, ﬂecai-
nide, or placebo. The Cardiac Arrhythmia SuppressionTrial. N Engl J Med . 1991;324:781 –788.
15.Raskin JS, Liu JJ, Abrao A, et al. Minimally invasive
posterior extrapleural thoracic sympathectomy in
children with medically refractory arrhythmias. Heart
Rhythm
. 2016;13:1381 –1385 .
16.Price J, Mah DY, Fynn-Thompson FL, et al. Suc-
cessful bilateral thoracoscopic sympathectomy forrecurrent ventricular arrhythmia in a pediatric patientwith hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. HeartRhythm Case
Rep. 2020;6:23 –26.
17.Pfammatter JP, Paul T, Lehmann C, et al. Ef ﬁcacy
and proarrhythmia of oral sotalol in pediatric patients.J Am Coll Cardiol . 1995;26:1002 –1007 .
18.Maron BJ, Shen WK, Link MS, et al. Ef ﬁcacy of
implantable cardioverter-de ﬁbrillators for the pre-
vention of sudden death in patients with hypertrophiccardiomyopathy. N Engl J Med . 2000;342:365 –373.
19.Garg J, Kewcharoen J, Shah K, et al. Clinical out-
comes of radiofrequency catheter ablation of ventriculartachycardia in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopa-thy. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol .2 0 2 3 ; 3 4 : 2 1 9 –224.
20.Nguyen A, Schaff HV. Electrical storms in patients
with apical aneurysms and hypertrophic cardiomyop-athy with midventricular obstruction: a case series.J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2017;154:e101 –e103 .
9.1. Recreational Physical Activity and
Competitive Sports
1.Saberi S, Wheeler M, Bragg-Gresham J, et al. Effect
of moderate-intensity exercise training on peakoxygen consumption in patients with hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA .
2017;317:1349 –1357 .
2.Klempfner R, Kamerman T, Schwammenthal E, et al.
Efﬁcacy of exercise training in symptomatic patients
with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: results of a struc-tured exercise training program in a cardiac rehabili-tation center. Eur J Prev Cardiol . 2015;22:13 –19.
3.Arnett DK, Blumenthal RS, Albert MA, et al. 2019
ACC/AHA guideline on the primary prevention of car-diovascular disease: a report of the American Collegeof Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Forceon Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2019;74:e177 –e232 .
4.Baggish AL, Ackerman MJ, Lampert R. Competitive
sport participation among athletes with heart disease:a call for a paradigm shift in decision making. Circu-
lation . 2017;136:1569 –1571.
5.Lampert R, Ackerman MJ, Marino BS, et al. Vigorous
exercise in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.JAMA Cardiol . 2023;8:595 –605.
6.Christiaans I, Birnie E, Bonsel GJ, et al. Manifest
disease, risk factors for sudden cardiac death, and
cardiac events in a large nationwide cohort of predic-tively tested hypertrophic cardiomyopathy mutationcarriers: determining the best cardiological screeningstrategy. Eur Heart J . 2011;32:1161 –1170 .
7.Dejgaard LA, Haland TF, Lie OH, et al. Vigorous
exercise in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.Int J Cardiol . 2018;250:157 –163.
8.Kwon S, Lee HJ, Han KD, et al. Association of
physical activity with all-cause and cardiovascular
mortality in 7666 adults with hypertrophic cardiomy-opathy (HCM): more physical activity is better. Br J
Sports Med . 2021;55:1034 –1040 .
9.Lampert R, Olshansky B, Heidbuchel H, et al. Safety
of sports for athletes with implantable cardioverter-
deﬁbrillators: results of a prospective, multinational
registry. Circulation . 2013;127:2021 –2030 .
10.Lampert R, Olshansky B, Heidbuchel H, et al.
Safety of sports for athletes with implantable
cardioverter-de ﬁbrillators: long-term results of a
prospective multinational registry. Circulation .
2017;135:2310 –2312 .
11.Pelliccia A, Lemme E, Maestrini V, et al. Does sport
participation worsen the clinical course of hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy? Clinical outcome of hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy in athletes. Circulation . 2018;137:531 –
533.
12.Turkowski KL, Bos JM, Ackerman NC, et al. Return-
to-play for athletes with genetic heart diseases. Cir-
culation . 2018;137:1086 –1088 .
13.Tobert KE, Bos JM, Garmany R, et al. Return-to-
play for athletes with long QT syndrome or geneticheart diseases predisposing to sudden death. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2021;78:594 –604.
14.Martinez KA, Bos JM, Baggish AL, et al. Return-to-
play for elite athletes with genetic heart diseasespredisposing to sudden cardiac eeath. J Am Coll Car-
diol. 2023;82:661 –670.
15.Ainsworth BE, Haskell WL, Herrmann SD, et al.
2011 compendium of physical activities: a second up-date of codes and MET values. Med Sci Sports Exerc .
2011;43:1575 –1581 .
16.Borg G. Ratings of perceived exertion and heart
rates during short-term cycle exercise and their use ina new cycling strength test. Int J Sports Med . 1982;3:
153–158.
17.Saberi S, Day SM. Exercise and hypertrophic car-
diomyopathy: time for a change of heart. Circulation .
2018;137:419 –421.
18.Maron BJ, Nishimura RA, Maron MS. Shared
decision-making in HCM. Nat Rev Cardiol . 2017;14:125 –
126.
19.Maron BJ, Doerer JJ, Haas TS, et al. Sudden deaths
in young competitive athletes: analysis of 1866 deathsin the United States, 1980-2006. Circulation .
2009;119:1085 –1092 .
20.Thiene G, Rizzo S, Schiavon M, et al. Structurally
normal hearts are uncommonly associated with suddendeaths in athletes and young people. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2019;73:3031 –3032 .
21.Bagnall RD, Weintraub RG, Ingles J, et al.
A prospective study of sudden cardiac death amongchildren and young adults. N Engl J Med . 2016;374:
2441 –2452 .
22.Corrado D, Basso C, Rizzoli G, et al. Does sports
activity enhance the risk of sudden death in adoles-cents and young adults? J Am Coll Cardiol . 2003;42:
1959 –1963 .
23.Harmon KG, Drezner JA, Maleszewski JJ, et al.
Pathogeneses of sudden cardiac death in National
Collegiate Athletic Association athletes. Circ Arrhythm
Electrophysiol . 2014;7:198 –204.
24.Ullal AJ, Abdelfattah RS, Ashley EA, et al. Hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathy as a cause of sudden cardiacdeath in the young: a meta-analysis. Am J Med .
2016;129:486 –496. e482 .
25.Eckart RE, Shry EA, Burke AP, et al. Sudden death
in young adults: an autopsy-based series of a popu-
lation undergoing active surveillance. J Am Coll Car-
diol. 2011;58:1254 –1261 .
26.Harmon KG, Asif IM, Klossner D, et al. Incidence of
sudden cardiac death in National Collegiate AthleticAssociation athletes. Circulation . 2011;123:1594 –1600 .
27.Weissler-Snir A, Allan K, Cunningham K, et al.
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy-related sudden cardiacdeath in young people in Ontario. Circulation .
2019;140:1706 –
1716.
28.Aro AL, Nair SG, Reinier K, et al. Population burden
of sudden death associated with hypertrophic cardio-myopathy. Circulation . 2017;136:1665 –1667 .
29.Landry CH, Allan KS, Connelly KA, et al. Sudden
cardiac arrest during participation in competitivesports. N Engl J Med . 2017;377:1943 –1953 .
30.Finocchiaro G, Radaelli D, D ’Errico S, et al. Sudden
cardiac death among adolescents in the UnitedKingdom. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2023;81:1007 –1017 .
31.Petek BJ, Churchill TW, Moulson N, et al. Sudden
cardiac death in National Collegiate Athletic Associa-
tion athletes: a 20-year study. Circulation . 2024;149:
80–89.
32.Etheridge SP, Saarel EV, Martinez MW. Exercise
participation and shared decision-making in patientswith inherited channelopathies and cardiomyopathies.Heart Rhythm . 2018;15:915 –920.
33.Pelto HF, Drezner JA. Design and implementation
of an emergency action plan for sudden cardiac arrest
in sport. J Cardiovasc Transl Res . 2020;13:331 –338.
34.Reineck E, Rolston B, Bragg-Gresham JL, et al.
Physical activity and other health behaviors in adultsJACC VOL. 83, NO. 23, 2024 Ommen et al
JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –2405 2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline2397

with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Am J Cardiol .
2013;111:1034 –1039 .
35.Sweeting J, Ingles J, Timperio A, et al. Physical
activity in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: prevalence ofinactivity and perceived barriers. Open Heart . 2016;3:
e000484 .
36.Piercy KL, Troiano RP, Ballard RM, et al. The
Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans. JAMA .
2018;320:2020 –2028 .
37.Ommen SR, Mital S, Burke MA, et al. 2020 AHA/
ACC guideline for the diagnosis and treatment ofpatients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a reportof the American College of Cardiology/AmericanHeart Association Joint Committee on Clinical Prac-tice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2020;76:e159 –
e240 .
38.Elliott PM, Anastasakis A, Borger MA, et al. 2014
ESC guidelines on diagnosis and management of hy-
pertrophic cardiomyopathy: the Task Force for theDiagnosis and Management of Hypertrophic Cardio-myopathy of the European Society of Cardiology(ESC). Eur Heart J . 2014;35:2733 –2779 .
9.2. Occupation in Patients With HCM
1.U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Aviation
Administration. Medical Certi ﬁcation. Accessed
September 14, 2022. https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/
regulations/medical/cardiovascular-advisory-panel-guidelines-medical-examination-commercial-motor
2.D’Arcy JL, Manen O, Davenport ED, et al. Heart
muscle disease management in aircrew. Heart .
2019;105:s50 –s56.
9.3. Pregnancy in Patients With HCM
1.Otto CM, Nishimura RA, Bonow RO, et al. 2020 ACC/
AHA guideline for the management of patients with
valvular heart disease: a report of the American Col-lege of Cardiology/American Heart Association JointCommittee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2021;77:e25 –e197 .
2.Xu Z, Fan J, Luo X, et al. Anticoagulation regimens
during pregnancy in patients with mechanical heartvalves: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Can J
Cardiol . 2016;32:1248.e1 –1248.e9 .
3.Regitz-Zagrosek V, Roos-Hesselink JW,
Bauersachs J, et al. 2018 ESC guidelines for the man-
agement of cardiovascular diseases during pregnancy.Eur Heart J . 2018;39:3165 –3241 .
4.Pieper PG, Walker F. Pregnancy in women with
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Neth Heart J . 2013;21:
14–18.
5.Easter SR, Rouse CE, Duarte V, et al. Planned vaginal
delivery and cardiovascular morbidity in pregnantwomen with heart disease. Am J Obstet Gynecol
.
2020;222:77.e1 –77.e11 .
6.Arbelo E, Protonotarios A, Gimeno JR, et al. 2023
ESC guidelines for the management of cardiomyopa-
thies. Eur Heart J . 2023;44:3503 –3626 .
7.Goland S, van Hagen IM, Elbaz-Greener G, et al.
Pregnancy in women with hypertrophic cardiomyopa-thy: data from the European Society of Cardiologyinitiated Registry of Pregnancy and Cardiac disease
(ROPAC). Eur Heart J . 2017;38:2683 –2690 .
8.Thaman R, Varnava A, Hamid MS, et al. Pregnancy
related complications in women with hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy. Heart . 2003;89:752 –756.9.Billebeau G, Etienne M, Cheikh-Khelifa R, et al.
Pregnancy in women with a cardiomyopathy: out-comes and predictors from a retrospective cohort. Arch
Cardiovasc Dis . 2018;111:199 –209.
10.Autore C, Conte MR, Piccininno M, et al. Risk
associated with pregnancy in hypertrophic cardiomy-opathy. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2002;40:1864 –1869 .
11.Hindricks G, Potpara T, Dagres N, et al. 2020 ESC
guidelines for the diagnosis and management of atrial
ﬁbrillation developed in collaboration with the Euro-
pean Association for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery (EACTS).Eur Heart J . 2021;42:373 –498.
12.Guttmann OP, Rahman MS, O ’Mahony C, et al.
Atrial ﬁbrillation and thromboembolism in patients
with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: systematic review.Heart . 2014;100:465 –472.
13.Guttmann OP, Pavlou M, O ’Mahony C, et al. Pre-
diction of thrombo-embolic risk in patients with hy-pertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM Risk-CVA). Eur J
Heart Fail . 2015;17:837 –845.
14.Maron BJ, Olivotto I, Bellone P, et al.
Clinical pro ﬁle of stroke in 900 patients with hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2002;39:
301–307.
15.Areia AL, Mota-Pinto A. Experience with direct oral
anticoagulants in pregnancy —a systematic review.
J Perinat Med . 2022;50:457
–461.
16.CAMZYOS [package insert] . Bristol-Myers Squibb
Company; 2022. Accessed September 14, 2022.
https://packageinserts.bms.com/pi/pi_camzyos.pdf
9.4. Patients With Comorbidities
1.Arnett DK, Blumenthal RS, Albert MA, et al. 2019
ACC/AHA guideline on the primary prevention of car-diovascular disease: a report of the American Collegeof Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Forceon Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2019;74:e177 –e232 .
2.Canepa M, Sorensen LL, Pozios I, et al. Comparison
of clinical presentation, left ventricular morphology,hemodynamics, and exercise tolerance in obese versusnonobese patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Am J Cardiol . 2013;112:1182 –1189 .
3.Olivotto I, Maron BJ, Tomberli B, et al. Obesity and
its association to phenotype and clinical course in hy-pertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2013;62:449 –457.
4.Fumagalli C, Maurizi N, Day SM, et al. Association of
obesity with adverse long-term outcomes in hyper-trophic cardiomyopathy. JAMA Cardiol . 2020;5:65 –72.
5.Eleid MF, Konecny T, Orban M, et al. High preva-
lence of abnormal nocturnal oximetry in patients with
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2009;54:1805 –1809 .
6.Konecny T, Brady PA, Orban M, et al. Interactions
between sleep disordered breathing and atrial ﬁbril-
lation in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Am J Cardiol . 2010;105:1597 –1602 .
7.Konecny T, Geske JB, Ludka O, et al. Decreased
exercise capacity and sleep-disordered breathing inpatients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Chest .
2015;147:1574 –1581 .
8.Wang S, Cui H, Song C, et al. Obstructive sleep
apnea is associated with nonsustainedventricular tachycardia in patients with hypertrophic
obstructive cardiomyopathy. Heart Rhythm . 2019;16:
694 –701.
9.Balaji S, DiLorenzo MP, Fish FA, et al. Impact of
obesity on left ventricular thickness in children withhypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Pediatr Cardiol .
2019;40:1253 –1257 .
10.Harper AR, Goel A, Grace C, et al. Common genetic
variants and modi ﬁable risk factors underpin hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathy susceptibility and expressiv-ity.Nat Genet . 2021;53:135
–142.
11.Ho CY, Day SM, Ashley EA, et al. Genotype and
lifetime burden of disease in hypertrophic cardiomy-opathy: insights from the Sarcomeric Human Cardio-myopathy Registry (SHaRE). Circulation . 2018;138:
1387 –1398 .
12.Gruner C, Ivanov J, Care M, et al. Toronto hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathy genotype score for prediction
of a positive genotype in hypertrophic cardiomyopa-thy. Circ Cardiovasc Genet . 2013;6:19 –26.
13.Claes GR, van Tienen FH, Lindsey P, et al. Hyper-
trophic remodelling in cardiac regulatory myosin lightchain (MYL2) founder mutation carriers. Eur Heart J .
2016;37:1815 –1822 .
14.Ho CY, Day SM, Axelsson A, et al. Valsartan in
early-stage hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a random-ized phase 2 trial. Nat Med . 2021;27:1818 –1824 .
10.1. Re ﬁning the Diagnosis of HCM
1.Captur G, Manisty CH, Raman B, et al. Maximal wall
thickness measurement in hypertrophic cardiomyopa-thy: biomarker variability and its impact on clinicalcare. J Am Coll Cardiol Img . 2021;14:2123 –2134 .
10.2. Developing Therapies to Attenuate or
Prevent Disease Progression
1.Ho CY, Day SM, Axelsson A, et al. Valsartan in early-
stage hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a randomized
phase 2 trial. Nat Med . 2021;27:1818 –1824 .
2.Green EM, Wakimoto H, Anderson RL, et al. A small-
molecule inhibitor of sarcomere contractility sup-
presses hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in mice. Science .
2016;351:617 –621.
10.3. Improving Care for Nonobstructive HCM
1.Heitner SB, Jacoby D, Lester SJ, et al. Mavacamten
treatment for obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopa-thy: a clinical trial. Ann Intern Med . 2019;170:741 –748.
2.Ho CY, Olivotto I, Jacoby D, et al. Study design and
rationale of EXPLORER-HCM: evaluation of mava-
camten in adults with symptomatic obstructive hy-pertrophic cardiomyopathy. Circ Heart Fail . 2020;13:
e006853 .
3.Desai MY, Owens A, Geske JB, et al. Dose-blinded
myosin inhibition in patients with obstructive hyper-trophic cardiomyopathy referred for septal reductiontherapy: outcomes through 32 weeks. Circulation .
2023;147:850 –863.
4.Ho CY, Mealiffe ME, Bach RG, et al. Evaluation of
mavacamten in symptomatic patients with non-
obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2020;75:2649 –2660 .
5.Maron MS, Masri A, Choudhury L, et al. Phase 2
study of a ﬁcamten in patients with obstructiveOmmen et al J A C CV O L .8 3 ,N O .2 3 ,2 0 2 4
2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –24052398

hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2023;81:34 –45.
10.4. Improving and Expanding Risk
Strati ﬁcation
1.Maron MS, Rowin EJ, Wessler BS, et al. Enhanced
American College of Cardiology/American Heart As-sociation strategy for prevention of sudden cardiacdeath in high-risk patients with hypertrophic cardio-myopathy. JAMA Cardiol . 2019;4:644 –657.
2.O’Mahony C, Tome-Esteban M, Lambiase PD, et al.
A validation study of the 2003 American College ofCardiology/European Society of Cardiology and 2011
American College of Cardiology Foundation/American
Heart Association risk strati ﬁcation and treatment al-
gorithms for sudden cardiac death in patients withhypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Heart . 2013;99:534 –
541.
3.Maron BJ, Spirito P, Shen W-K, et al. Implantable
cardioverter-de ﬁbrillators and prevention of sudden
cardiac death in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. JAMA .
2007;298:405 –412.
4.Habib M, Adler A, Fard ﬁni K, et al. Progression of
myocardial ﬁbrosis in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a
cardiac magnetic resonance study. J Am Coll Cardiol
Img. 2021;14:947 –958.
5.Heydari BSA, Jerosch-Herold M, et al. 3-
Dimensional strain analysis of hypertrophic cardiomy-opathy: insights from the NHLBI international HCMregistry. J Am Coll Cardiol Img . 2023;16:478 –491.
6.Fahmy ASRE, Jaafar N, et al. Radiomics of late
gadolinium enhancement reveals prognostic value ofmyocardial scar heterogeneity in hypertrophic cardio-
myopathy. J Am Coll Cardiol Img . 2023;S1936-
1878X(1923)00222-X .
10.5. Arrhythmia Management
1.Moore JC, Trager L, Anzia LE, et al. Dofetilide for
suppression of atrial ﬁbrillation in hypertrophic car-
diomyopathy: a case series and literature review.Pacing Clin Electrophysiol . 2018;41:396 –401.
2.Robinson K, Frenneaux MP, Stockins B, et al.
Atrial ﬁbrillation in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a
longitudinal study. J Am Coll Cardiol . 1990;15:1279 –
1285 .
3.Miller CAS MM, Estes NAM, et al. Safety, side effects
and relative ef ﬁcacy of medications for rhythm control
of atrial ﬁbrillation in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Am J Cardiol . 2019;123:1859 –1862 .
4.Providencia R, Elliott P, Patel K, et al. Catheter
ablation for atrial ﬁbrillation in hypertrophic cardio-
myopathy: a systematic review and meta-analysis.Heart . 2016;102:1533 –1543 .
5.Zhao D-S, Shen Y, Zhang Q, et al. Outcomes of
catheter ablation of atrial ﬁbrillation in patients with
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a systematic review andmeta-analysis. Europace . 2016;18:508 –520.
6.Kramer CM, DiMarco JP, Kolm P, et al. Predictors of
major atrial ﬁbrillation endpoints in the National Heart,
Lung, and Blood Institute HCMR. J Am Coll Cardiol EP .
2021;7:1376 –1386 .
7.Reddy VY, Neuzil P, Koruth JS, et al. Pulsed ﬁeld
ablation for pulmonary vein isolation in atrial ﬁbrilla-
tion. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;74:315 –326.10.6. Expanding Understanding of the Genetic
Architecture of HCM
1.Kelly MA, Caleshu C, Morales A, et al. Adaptation
and validation of the ACMG/AMP variant classi ﬁcation
framework for MYH7-associated inherited cardiomy-opathies: recommendations by ClinGen ’s Inherited
Cardiomyopathy Expert Panel. Genet Med . 2018;20:
351–359.
2.Harper AR, Goel A, Grace C, et al. Common genetic
variants and modi ﬁable risk factors underpin hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathy susceptibility and expressiv-
ity.Nat Genet . 2021;53:135 –142.
3.Tadros R, Francis C, Xu X, et al. Shared genetic
pathways contribute to risk of hypertrophic anddilated cardiomyopathies with opposite directions ofeffect. Nat Genet . 2021;53:128 –134.
KEY WORDS ACC/AHA Clinical Practice
Guidelines, athlete, atrial ﬁbrillation, cardiac
myosin inhibitors, cardiovascular magneticresonance imaging, diastolic dysfunction,
echocardiography, exe rcise, exercise stress
testing, family screening, genetics, hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy, implantable cardioverterdeﬁbrillator, left ventricular out ﬂow tract
obstruction, occupation, physical activity,pregnancy, rhythm monitoring, risk
strati ﬁcation, sarcomeric genes, septal alcohol
ablation, septal reduction therapy, shared
decision-making, sports, sudden cardiac death,surgical myectomy, systolic dysfunction,ventricular arrhythmiasJACC VOL. 83, NO. 23, 2024 Ommen et al
JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –2405 2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline2399

APPENDIX 1. AUTHOR RELATIONSHIPS WITH INDUSTRY AND OTHER ENTITIES —2024 AHA/ACC/AMSSM/HRS/PACES/SCMR GUIDELINE FOR THE
MANAGEMENT OF HYPERTROPHIC CARDIOMYOPATHY
Committee Member Employment ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalPersonal
ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational, or
Other Financial Bene ﬁtE x p e r t W i t n e s s
Steve R. Ommen
(Chair)Mayo Clinic —Director, Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy
ClinicNone None None None None None
Carolyn Y. Ho (Vice
Chair)Brigham & Women ’s Hospital —Director, Cardiovascular Genetics
CenterRELEVANT
nBristol Myers
Squibb
nCytokinetics
NOT RELEVANT
nRocket
Pharmaceuticals
nViz.aiNone None RELEVANT
nCytokinetics, PI *
nPﬁzer, PI *NOT RELEVANT
nBiomarin *
nNovartis ‡
RELEVANT
nBristol Myers
Squibb *None
Irfan M. Asif University of Alabama at Birmingham —Associate Dean, Primary Care
and Rural Health; Professor and Chair, Department of Family and
CommunityNone None None None NOT RELEVANT
nCMS *
nHRSA *None
Seshadri Balaji Oregon Health & Science University —Professor of Pediatrics,
Division of Cardiology, School of Medicine; Director,
Pediatric ElectrophysiologyRELEVANT
nJanssen
Pharmaceuticals
nMilestone
PharmaceuticalsNone None RELEVANT
nMedtronic †None NOT RELEVANT
nDefendant,
Sudden deathevaluation,
2022
Michael A. Burke Emory University School of Medicine —Associate Professor
of MedicineNone None None None NOT RELEVANT
nPﬁzer‡None
Sharlene M. Day University of Pennsylvania —Director, Translational Research, Division
of Cardiovascular Medicine and Cardiovascular InstituteNone None None RELEVANT
nBristol Myers
Squibb *
nLexicon
Pharmaceuticals *
NOT RELEVANT
nCytokinetics
(DSMB)None None
Joseph A. Dearani Mayo Clinic —Director of Pediatric and Adult Congenital Heart
Surgery; Professor of SurgeryNone None None None None None
Kelly C. Epps Inova —Interventional Cardiologist None None None None None None
Lauren Evanovich Patient Representative None None None None None None
Continued on the next pageOmmen et al J A C CV O L .8 3 ,N O .2 3 ,2 0 2 4
2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –24052400

Committee Member Employment ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalPersonal
ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational, or
Other Financial Bene ﬁtE x p e r t W i t n e s s
Victor A. Ferrari University of Pennsylvania —Chair, Penn Cardiovascular Imaging
Council, Depts. of Medicine, Radiology and Penn Cardiovascular
Institute; Professor Cardiovascular Medicine; Professor, RadiologyNone None None NOT RELEVANT
nNHLBI/NIH
(DSMB) †
nJCMR †None None
José A. Joglar UT Southwestern —Program Director, Clinical Cardiac
Electrophysiology Fellowship ProgramNone None None None None None
Sadiya S. Khan Northwestern University —Assistant Professor of Medicine None None None None None None
Jeffrey J. Kim Baylor College of Medicine —Director, Electrophysiology & Pacing;
Professor, Pediatric CardiologyNone None None None None None
Michelle M. Kittleson Cedars-Sinai —Director of Education in Heart Failure and
Transplantation; Director of Heart Failure Research; Professor of
MedicineNone NOT RELEVANT
nEncore Medical
Education
nJournal of
Heart and Lung
TransplantationNone None NOT RELEVANT
nActelion ‡
nEidos ‡
nGilead (One
Legacy/
Baylor) ‡
nNIH ‡
nSanoﬁ
(Genzyme) ‡
nUnited
Therapeutics ‡None
Chayakrit
KrittanawongBaylor College of Medicine —Staff Physician None None None None None None
Matthew W. Martinez Atlantic Health System/Morristown Medical Center —Director, Sports
Cardiology; Director, Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy ProgramRELEVANT
nBristol Myers
Squibb
NOT RELEVANT
nMajor League
SoccerNone None None RELEVANT
nCytokinetics ‡None
Seema Mital Hospital for Sick Children —Head, Cardiovascular Research; Staff
Cardiologist, Heart Function and Transplant ProgramRELEVANT
nBristol Myers
Squibb
nTenaya
TherapeuticsNone None None None None
Continued on the next pageAPPENDIX 1. CONTINUEDJACC VOL. 83, NO. 23, 2024 Ommen et al
JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –2405 2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline2401

Committee Member Employment ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalPersonal
ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational, or
Other Financial Bene ﬁtE x p e r t W i t n e s s
Srihari S. Naidu New York Medical College —Professor of Medicine; Westchester
Medical Center —Director, HCM Center and Cardiac Cath LabsRELEVANT
nBristol Myers
Squibb
nCytokineticsNone None None None None
Sara Saberi University of Michigan Health Systems —Assistant Profession,
Division of Cardiovascular MedicineRELEVANT
nBristol Myers
Squibb *
nCytokineticsNone None RELEVANT
nBristol Myers
Squibb †
nCytokinetics †
nNovartis †NOT RELEVANT
nHCMS †None
Christopher Semsarian The University of Sydney —Professor of Medicine; Centenary
Institute —Head, Molecular Cardiology Program; Royal Prince Alfred
Hospital, Central Clinical School —CardiologistNone None None None None None
Sabrina Times § AHA/ACC —Science and Health Advisor, Guidelines None None None None None None
Cynthia Burstein
WaldmanHCMBeat —Founder and Editor; MGM, Vice President, Library Rights
ManagementNone None None None None None
This table represents all relationships of committee members with industry and other entities that were reported by authors, including those not dee med to be relevant to this document, at the time this document was under development. The table does
not necessarily re ﬂect relationships with industry at the time of publication. A person is deemed to have a signi ﬁcant interest in a business if the interest represents ownership of $5% of the voting stock or share of the business entity, or ownership
of$$5000 of the fair market value of the business entity; or if funds received by the person from the business entity exceed 5% of the person ’s gross income for the previous year. Relationships that exist with no ﬁnancial bene ﬁt are also included for the
purpose of transparency. Relationships in this table are modest unless otherwise noted. Please refer to https://www.acc.org/guidelines/about-guidelines-and-clinical-documents/relationships-with-industry-policy for de ﬁnitions of disclosure categories
or additional information about the ACC/AHA Disclosure Policy for Writing Committees.
*Signi ﬁcant relationship.
†Noﬁnancial bene ﬁt.
‡This disclosure was entered under the Clinical Trial Enroller category in the ACC ’s disclosure system. To appear in this category, the author acknowledges that there is no direct or institutional relationship with the trial sponsor as deﬁned in the (ACCF or
AHA/ACC) Disclosure Policy for Writing Committees.
§Sabrina Times is an AHA/ACC joint staff member and acts as the Guideline Advisor for the “2024 AHA/ACC/AMSSM/HRS/PACES Guideline for the Management of Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy. ”No relevant relationships to report. Nonvoting author on
measures and not included/counted in the RWI balance for this writing committee.
ACC indicates American College of Cardiology; ACCF, American College of Cardiology Foundation; AHA, American Heart Association; AMSSM, American M edical Society for Sports Medicine; CMS, Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services; DSMB, data
and safety monitoring board; HCM, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; HCMS, Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Medical Society; HRS, Heart Rhythm Society; HR SA, Health Resources & Services Administration; JCMR; Journal of Cardiovascular Magnetic
Resonance ; NHLBI, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; NIH, National Institutes of Health; PACES, Pediatric & Congenital Electrophysiology Society; P I, principal investigator; RWI, relationships with industry and other entities; and UT, The University
of Texas.APPENDIX 1. CONTINUEDOmmen et al J A C CV O L .8 3 ,N O .2 3 ,2 0 2 4
2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –24052402

APPENDIX 2. REVIEWER RELATIONSHIPS WITH INDUSTRY AND OTHER ENTITIES (COMPREHENSIVE) —2024 AHA/ACC/AMSSM/HRS/PACES/
SCMR GUIDELINE FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF HYPERTROPHIC CARDIOMYOPATHY
Reviewer Representation Employment ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalPersonal
ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational, or
Other Financial
Bene ﬁtExpert
Witness
Mark S. Link, Chair AHA/ACC HCM Guideline Peer Review
CommitteeUT Southwestern Medical Center None None None None nJournal Watch
Cardiology
nCirculation ,Associate
Editor †
nUpToDate †None
Anandita Agarwala AHA/ACC HCM Guideline Peer Review
CommitteeBaylor Scott & White Health —The
Heart Hospital Baylor PlanoNone None None nNIH*None None
Chad Asplund AHA/ACC HCM Guideline Peer Review
Committee, representing AMSSMGeorgetown University None None None None None None
Michael Ayers AHA/ACC HCM Guideline Peer Review
CommitteeUniversity of Virginia nAtheneum
nBristol Myers
Squibb †
nHFSAnBristol
MyersSquibb †None None
nCytokinetics ‡ nPlaintiff,
Chestpain, 2023
C. Anwar Chahal AHA/ACC HCM Guideline Peer Review
CommitteeWellspan Health;
Mayo Clinic
Barts Heart CentreNone None None None None None
Jonathan Chrispin AHA/ACC HCM Guideline Peer Review
CommitteeJohns Hopkins University
nAbbott †
nBiosense
Webster
nBoston
Scienti ﬁc*None None None nAbbott ‡
nBiosense Webster ‡None
Aarti Dalal AHA/ACC HCM Guideline Peer Review
CommitteeVanderbilt University nMedtronic †None None None None None
Alejandro E. De Feria
AlsinaAHA/ACC HCM Guideline Peer Review
CommitteeUniversity of Pennsylvania None None None None None None
Jonathan Drezner AHA/ACC HCM Guideline Peer Review
CommitteeUniversity of Washington None None None nAMSSM *
nNational Center
for Catastrophic
Sports Injury
Research *None None
Continued on the next pageJACC VOL. 83, NO. 23, 2024 Ommen et al
JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –2405 2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline2403

Reviewer Representation Employment ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalPersonal
ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational, or
Other Financial
Bene ﬁtExpert
Witness
Rajesh Kabra AHA/ACC HCM Guideline Peer
Review CommitteeKansas City Heart Rhythm Institute
University of Tennessee Health Science
CenternVolta MedicalNone None None nAbbott, Fellowship
Grant †
nBiosense Webster,
Fellowship Grant †
nMedtronic,
Fellowship Grant †
nIqvia Biotech ‡
nMedtronic ‡None
Sabeeda Kadavath AHA/ACC HCM Guideline Peer
Review CommitteeSt. Bernards Medical Center None None None None None None
Elizabeth S. Kaufman AHA/ACC HCM Guideline Peer Review
Committee Member, representing HRSThe MetroHealth System None None None None nCIH ‡None
Sabra Lewsey AHA/ACC HCM Guideline Peer Review
CommitteeJohns Hopkins University None None None None nAssociate of Black
Cardiologists,
Volunteer position *None
James P. MacNamara AHA/ACC HCM Guideline Peer
Review CommitteeUT Southwestern Medical Center nLexiconNone None nBoehringer
Ingelheim
nBristol Myers
Squibb †
nCytokinetics †
nSardacor †None None
Anjali Owens AHA/ACC HCM Guideline Peer
Review CommitteeUniversity of Pennsylvania nBioMarin
Pharmaceuticals
nBristol Myers
Squibb †
nCytokinetics †
nEdgewise
Therapeutics
nLexeo
Therapeutics
nLexicon
nMyokardia †
nPﬁzer
nRenovacor
nStealth
Biotherapeutics
nTenaya
TherapeuticsNone None nArray
Biopharma, PI *None None
Continued on the next pageAPPENDIX 2. CONTINUEDOmmen et al J A C CV O L .8 3 ,N O .2 3 ,2 0 2 4
2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –24052404

Reviewer Representation Employment ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalPersonal
ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational, or
Other Financial
Bene ﬁtExpert
Witness
Hena Patel AHA/ACC HCM Guideline Peer Review
CommitteeUniversity of Chicago None None None None None None
Nosheen Reza AHA/ACC HCM Guideline Peer Review
Committee, representing ACC/AHA JCPMUniversity of Pennsylvania nBristol Myers
Squibb *
nRoche
Diagnostics
nZollNone None nNIH † nAlleviant Medical,
Inc.
nAstraZeneca *
nBristol Myers
Squibb ‡
nCytokinetics *‡
nPﬁzer‡None
Aldo L. Schenone AHA/ACC HCM Guideline Peer Review
CommitteeMonte ﬁore Medical Center None nBristol
Myers
SquibbNone None None None
Daniel Swistel AHA/ACC HCM Guideline Peer Review
CommitteeNew York University None None None None None None
Jose Vargas AHA/ACC HCM Guideline Peer Review
CommitteeUS Department of Veterans Affairs nBioclinica †None None None None None
This table represents all reviewers ’relationships with industry and other entities that were reported at the time of peer review, including those not deemed to be relevant to this documen t, at the time this document was under review. The table does not
necessarily re ﬂect relationships with industry at the time of publication. A person is deemed to have a signi ﬁcant interest in a business if the interest represents ownership of $5% of the voting stock or share of the business entity, or ownership
of$$5000 of the fair market value of the business entity; or if funds received by the person from the business entity exceed 5% of the person ’s gross income for the previous year. Relationships that exist with no ﬁnancial bene ﬁt are also included for the
purpose of transparency. Relationships in this table are modest unless otherwise noted. Please refer to https://www.acc.org/guidelines/about-guidelines-and-clinical-documents/relationships-with-industry-policy for de ﬁnitions of disclosure categories
or additional information about the ACC/AHA Disclosure Policy for Writing Committees.
*Noﬁnancial bene ﬁt.
†Signiﬁcant relationship.
‡This disclosure was entered under the Clinical Trial Enroller category in the ACC ’s disclosure system. To appear in this category, the author acknowledges that there is no direct or institutional relationship with the trial sponsor as de ﬁned in the (ACCF or
AHA/ACC) Disclosure Policy for Writing Committees.
ACC indicates American College of Cardiology; ACCF, American College of Cardiology Foundation; AHA, American Heart Association; AMSSM; American M edical Society for Sports Medicine; CIH, Canadian Institute of Health; HCM, hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy; HFSA, Heart Failure Society of America; HRS, Heart Rhythm Society; JCPM, ACC/AHA Joint Committee on Performance Measures, NIH, Nat ional Institutes of Health; PACES, Pediatric & Congenital Electrophysiology Society; PI, principal
investigator; and UT, University of Texas.APPENDIX 2. CONTINUEDJACC VOL. 83, NO. 23, 2024 Ommen et al
JUNE 11, 2024:2324 –2405 2024 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Guideline2405