CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINE: FULL TEXT
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Guideline for
Coronary Artery Revascularization
A Report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association
Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines
Writing
CommitteeMembers *Jennifer S. Lawton, MD, FAHA, Chair y
Jacqueline E. Tamis-Holland, MD, FAHA, FACC, FSCAI,Vice Chair z
Sripal Bangalore, MD, MHA, FACC, FAHA, FSCAI y
Eric R. Bates, MD, FACC, FAHA y
Theresa M. Beckie, P
HD, FAHA y
James M. Bischoff, ME Dy
John A. Bittl, MD, FACC y
Mauricio G. Cohen, MD, FACC, FSCAI x
J. Michael DiMaio, MD y
Creighton W. Don, MD, P HD, FACC jj
Stephen E. Fremes, MD, FACC
Mario F. Gaudino, MD, P HD, MSCE, FACC, FAHA y
Zachary D. Goldberger, MD, FACC, FAHA z
Michael C. Grant, MD, MSE yJang B. Jaswal, MS y
Paul A. Kurlansky, MD, FACC y
Roxana Mehran, MD, FACC y
Thomas S. Metkus J R, MD, FACC y
Lorraine C. Nnacheta, D RPH, MPH y
Sunil V. Rao, MD, FACC y
Frank W. Sellke, MD, FACC, FAHA y
Garima Sharma, MD, FACC y
Celina M. Yong, MD, MBA, MS C, FSCAI, FACC, FAHA y
Brittany A. Zwischenberger, MD y
*Writing committee members are required to recuse themselves from
voting on sections to which their speci ﬁc relationships with industry may
apply; see Appendix 1 for detailed information. yACC/AHA Representative.
zACC/AHA Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines Liaison. xACC/
AHA Task Force on Data Standards Representative. jjSCAI Representative.
ISSN 0735-1097/$36.00 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2021.09.006This document was approved by the American College of Cardiology Clinical Policy Approval Committee, the American Heart Association Science
Advisory and Coordinating Committee, the American College of Cardiology Science and Quality Committee, the American Heart Association Executive
Committee, and the Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions Executive Committee in August 2021.
The American College of Cardiology requests that this document be cited as follows: Lawton JS, Tamis-Holland JE, Bangalore S, Bates ER, Beckie TM,
Bischoff JM, Bittl JA, Cohen MG, DiMaio JM, Don CW, Fremes SE, Gaudino MF, Goldberger ZD, Grant MC, Jaswal JB, Kurlansky PA, Mehran R, Metkus TSJr, Nnacheta LC, Rao SV, Sellke FW, Sharma G, Yong CM, Zwischenberger BA. 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI guideline for coronary artery revascularization: a repor t
of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2022;79:e21-e129.
This article has been copublished in Circulation .
Copies: This document is available on the websites of the American College of Cardiology ( www.acc.org ) and the American Heart Association
(professional.heart.org ). For copies of this document, please contact the Elsevier Inc. Reprint Department via fax (212-633-3820) or e-mail ( reprints@
elsevier.com ).
Permissions: Multiple copies, modi ﬁcation, alteration, enhancement, and/or distribution of this document are not permitted without the express
permission of the American College of Cardiology. Requests may be completed online via the Elsevier website ( https://www.elsevier.com/about/
policies/copyright/permissions ).JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN COLLEGE OF CARDIOLOGY VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
ª2022 BY THE AMERICAN COLLEGE OF CARDIOLOGY FOUNDATION
AND THE AMERICAN HEART ASSOCIATION, INC.PUBLISHED BY ELSEVIER

ACC/AHA Joint
CommitteeMembersPatrick T. O ’Gara, MD, MACC, FAHA, Chair
Joshua A. Beckman, MD, MS, FAHA, FACC,Chair-ElectGlenn N. Levine, MD, FACC, FAHA, Immediate
Past Chair {
Sana M. Al-Khatib, MD, MHS, FACC, FAHA {
Anastasia L. Armbruster, PharmD, FACC
Kim K. Birtcher, PharmD, MS, AACC {
Joaquin E. Cigarroa, MD, FACC {
Lisa de las Fuentes, MD, MS, FAHAAnita Deswal, MD, MPH, FACC, FAHADave L. Dixon, PharmD, FACC {
Lee A. Fleisher, MD, FACC, FAHA {
Federico Gentile, MD, FACC {
Zachary D. Goldberger, MD, FACC, FAHA {
Bulent Gorenek, MD, FACCNorrisa Haynes, MD, MPHAdrian F. Hernandez, MD, MHS
Mark A. Hlatky, MD, FACC, FAHA {
José A. Joglar, MD, FACC, FAHAW. Schuyler Jones, MD, FACCJoseph E. Marine, MD, FACC {
Daniel B. Mark, MD, MPH, FACC, FAHA
Debabrata Mukherjee, MD, FACC, FAHA, FSCAILatha P. Palaniappan, MD, MS, FACC, FAHAMariann R. Piano, RN, PhD, FAHATanveer Rab, MD, FACCErica S. Spatz, MD, MS, FACCJacqueline E. Tamis-Holland, MD, FAHA, FACC, FSCAIDuminda N. Wijeysundera, MD, PhD {
Y. Joseph Woo, MD, FACC, FAHA
{Former Joint Committee member; current member during the
writing effort.
ABSTRACT
AIM The guideline for coronary artery revascularization replaces the 2011 coronary artery bypass graft surgery and the 2011 and
2015 percutaneous coronary intervention guidelines, providing a patient-centric approach to guide clinicians in the treatment ofpatients with signi ﬁcant coronary artery disease undergoing coronary revascularization as well as the supporting documentation to
encourage their use.
METHODS A comprehensive literature search was conducted from May 2019 to September 2019, encompassing studies, reviews,
and other evidence conducted on human subjects that were published in English from PubMed, EMBASE, the Cochrane Collabora-tion, CINHL Complete, and other relevant databases. Additional relevant studies, published through May 2021, were also considered.
STRUCTURE Coronary artery disease remains a leading cause of morbidity and mortality globally. Coronary revascularization is an
important therapeutic option when managing patients with coronary artery disease. The 2021 coronary artery revascularization
guideline provides recommendations based on contemporary evidence for the treatment of these patients. The recommendationspresent an evidence-based approach to managing patients with coronary artery disease who are being considered for coronaryrevascularization, with the intent to improve quality of care and align with patients ’interests.
CONTENTS
ABSTRACT ..................................... e22
TOP 10 TAKE-HOME MESSAGES .................. e24
PREAMBLE ..................................... e25
1. INTRODUCTION ............................. e26
1.1. Methodology and Evidence Review .......... e26
1.2. Organization of the Writing Committee ....... e26
1.3. Document Review and Approval ............. e281.4. Scope of the Guideline ..................... e29
1.5. Class of Recommendation and Level of
Evidence ................................ e29
1.6. Abbreviations ............................ e29
2.IMPROVING EQUITY OF CARE IN
REVASCULARIZATION AND SHAREDDECISION-MAKING ..........................
e30
2.1. Improving Equity of Care in Revascularization .e30
2.2. Shared Decision-Making and
Informed Consent ......................... e31Lawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e22

3. PREPROCEDURAL ASSESSMENT AND THE
HEART TEAM ................................ e33
3.1. The Heart Team .......................... e33
3.2. Predicting Patient Risk of Death With CABG ...e35
4. DEFINING LESION SEVERITY ................. e35
4.1. Angiography to De ﬁne Anatomy and Assess
Lesion Severity ........................... e35
4.2. De ﬁning Coronary Artery Lesion Complexity:
Calculation of the SYNTAX (Synergy Between PCI
With TAXUS and Cardiac Surgery) Score ...... e36
4.3. Use of Coronary Physiology to Guide
Revascularization With PCI ................. e37
4.4. Intravascular Ultrasound to Assess Lesion
Severity ................................. e38
5. REVASCULARIZATION IN STEMI ............... e38
5.1. Revascularization of the Infarct Artery in Patients
With STEMI .............................. e38
5.2. Revascularization of the Non-Infarct Artery in
Patients With STEMI ....................... e41
6. REVASCULARIZATION IN NSTE-ACS ........... e44
6.1. Coronary Angiography and Revascularization in
Patients With NSTE-ACS .................... e44
7. REVASCULARIZATION IN SIHD ................ e47
7.1. Revascularization to Improve Survival in SIHD
Compared With Medical Therapy ............ e47
7.2. Revascularization to Reduce Cardiovascular Events
in SIHD Compared With Medical Therapy ....... e50
7.3. Revascularization to Improve Symptoms ...... e51
8. SITUATIONS IN WHICH PCI OR CABG WOULD BE
PREFERRED ................................ e51
8.1. Patients With Complex Disease .............. e51
8.2. Patients With Diabetes ..................... e52
8.3. Patients With Previous CABG ............... e53
8.4. DAPT Adherence ......................... e54
9. SPECIAL POPULATIONS AND SITUATIONS ..... e55
9.1. Revascularization in Pregnant Patients ....... e55
9.2. Revascularization in Older Patients .......... e55
9.3. Revascularization in Patients With Chronic
Kidney Disease (CKD) ..................... e56
9.4. Revascularization in Patients Before Noncardiac
Surgery ................................. e57
9.5. Revascularization in Patients to Reduce
Ventricular Arrhythmias ................... e589.6. Revascularization in Patients With SCAD ...... e59
9.7. Revascularization in Patients With Cardiac
Allografts ................................ e59
9.8. Revascularization in Patients Before Transcatheter
Aortic Valve Replacement (TAVR) ............ e60
9.9. Revascularization in Patients With Anomalous
Coronary Artery .......................... e60
10.GENERAL PROCEDURAL ISSUES FOR PCI ...... e60
10.1. Radial and Femoral Approaches for PCI ...... e60
10.2. Choice of Stent Type ..................... e61
10.3. Use of Intravascular Imaging ............... e62
10.4. Thrombectomy .......................... e63
10.5. Treatment of Calci ﬁed Lesions ............. e63
10.6. Treatment of Saphenous Vein Graft (SVG)
Disease (Previous CABG) .................. e64
10.7. Treatment of CTO ........................ e65
10.8. Treatment of Patients With Stent Restenosis ..e66
10.9. Hemodynamic Support for Complex PCI ..... e67
11.PHARMACOTHERAPY IN PATIENTS UNDERGOING
PCI ........................................ e67
11.1. Aspirin and Oral P2Y12 Inhibitors in Patients
Undergoing PCI .......................... e67
11.2. Intravenous P2Y12 Inhibitors in Patients
Undergoing PCI .......................... e70
11.3. Intravenous Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa Inhibitors in
Patients Undergoing PCI ................... e70
11.4. Heparin, Low-Molecular-Weight Heparin, and
Bivalirudin in Patients Undergoing PCI ....... e71
12.GENERAL PROCEDURAL ISSUES FOR CABG .... e73
12.1. Perioperative Considerations in Patients
Undergoing CABG ........................ e73
12.2. Bypass Conduits in Patients Undergoing
CABG .................................. e74
12.3. CABG in Patients Undergoing Other Cardiac
Surgery ................................. e75
12.4. Use of Epiaortic Ultrasound in Patients
Undergoing CABG ........................ e76
12.5. Use of Cardiopulmonary Bypass in Patients
Undergoing CABG ........................ e77
13.PHARMACOTHERAPY IN PATIENTS UNDERGOING
CABG ...................................... e77
13.1. Insulin Infusion and Other Measures to Reduce
Sternal Wound Infection in Patients Undergoing
CABG .................................. e77JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee23

13.2. Antiplatelet Therapy in Patients Undergoing
CABG .................................. e79
13.3. Beta Blockers and Amiodarone in Patients
Undergoing CABG ........................ e80
14. PHARMACOTHERAPY IN PATIENTS AFTER
REVASCULARIZATION ....................... e81
14.1. Pharmacotherapy for Risk Factor Control in
Patients After Revascularization ............ e81
14.2. Dual Antiplatelet Therapy in Patients After PCI .e81
14.3. Antiplatelet Therapy in Patients After CABG ..e83
14.4. Beta Blockers in Patients After
Revascularization ........................ e84
14.5. Beta Blockers for the Prevention of Atrial
Fibrillation After CABG .................... e84
14.6. Antiplatelet Therapy in Patients With Atrial
Fibrillation on Anticoagulation After PCI ..... e85
15. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR ADDRESSING
PSYCHOSOCIAL FACTORS AND LIFESTYLE
CHANGES AFTER REVASCULARIZATION ....... e86
15.1. Cardiac Rehabilitation and Education ........ e86
15.2. Smoking Cessation in Patients After
Revascularization ........................ e87
15.3. Psychological Interventions in Patients After
Revascularization ........................ e88
16. REVASCULARIZATION OUTCOMES ............ e89
16.1. Assessment of Outcomes in Patients After
Revascularization ......................... e89
17. UNANSWERED QUESTIONS AND FUTURE
DIRECTIONS ................................ e90
17.1. Special Populations ....................... e90
17.1.1. Underrepresented Racial and Ethnic
Groups ........................... e90
17.2. Special Clinical Situations .................. e90
17.2.1. Left Ventricular Dysfunction ......... e90
17.2.2. SCAD ............................. e91
17.2.3. Coronary Artery Aneurysm ........... e91
17.2.4. Myocardial Bridging ................. e91
17.2.5. Treatment of Graft Failure ............ e91
17.2.6. Antiplatelet Therapy in Patients With ACS
After CABG With an Indication for
Anticoagulation ..................... e91
17.3. Revascularization Considerations ............ e91
17.3.1. Use of the Radial Artery for a Conduit
After Radial Artery Catheterization ..... e9117.3.2. Completeness of Revascularization in
Multivessel Disease ................ e92
17.3.3. Hybrid Coronary Surgery ............ e92
17.3.4. Revascularization Before Percutaneous
Valve Procedures .................. e92
17.3.5. Revascularization Before Organ
Transplantation .................... e93
REFERENCES .................................. e94
APPENDIX 1
Author Relationships With Industry and Other
Entities (Relevant) ........................... e124
APPENDIX 2
Reviewer Relationships With Industry and Other
Entities (Comprehensive) ..................... e126
TOP 10 TAKE-HOME MESSAGES
1. Treatment decisions regarding coronary revasculari-
zation in patients with coronary artery disease shouldbe based on clinical indications, regardless of sex,
race, or ethnicity, because there is no evidence that
some patients bene ﬁt less than others, and efforts to
reduce disparities of care are warranted.
2. In patients being considere d for coronary revascular-
ization for whom the optimal treatment strategy isunclear, a multidisciplinary Heart Team approach isrecommended. Treatment decisions should be patientcentered, incorporate patient preferences and goals,
and include shared decision-making.
3. For patients with signi ﬁcant left main disease, surgi-
cal revascularization is indicated to improve survivalrelative to that likely to be achieved with medicaltherapy. Percutaneous revascularization is a reason-able option to improve survival, compared withmedical therapy, in selected patients with low tomedium anatomic complexity of coronary artery
disease and left main disease that is equally suitable
f o rs u r g i c a lo rp e r c u t a n e o u sr e v a s c u l a r i z a t i o n .
4. Updated evidence from contemporary trials supple-
ment older evidence with regard to mortality bene ﬁto f
revascularization in patients with stable ischemic heartdisease, normal left ventricu lar ejection fraction, and
triple-vessel coronary artery disease. Surgical revas-c u l a r i z a t i o nm a yb er e a s o n a b l et oi m p r o v es u r v i v a l .
A survival bene ﬁt with percutaneous revascularization
is uncertain. Revascularization decisions are basedon consideration of disease complexity, technicalfeasibility of treatment, and a Heart Team discussion.
5. The use of a radial artery as a surgical revasculariza-
tion conduit is preferred versus the use of aLawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e24

saphenous vein conduit to bypass the second most
important target vessel with signi ﬁcant stenosis after
the left anterior descending coronary artery. Bene ﬁts
include superior patency, reduced adverse cardiacevents, and improved survival.
6. Radial artery access is re commended in patients un-
dergoing percutaneous in tervention who have acute
coronary syndrome or stable ischemic heart disease,
to reduce bleeding and vascular complicationscompared with a femoral approach. Patients withacute coronary syndrome also bene ﬁt from a reduc-
tion in mortality rate with this approach.
7. A short duration of dual antiplatelet therapy after
percutaneous revascularization in patients with stable
ischemic heart disease is reasonable to reduce the riskof bleeding events. After consideration of recurrentischemia and bleeding risks, select patients may safelytransition to P2Y12 inhibitor monotherapy and stopaspirin after 1 to 3 months of dual antiplatelet therapy.
8. Staged percutaneous intervention (while in hospital
or after discharge) of a signi ﬁcantly stenosed non-
culprit artery in patients presenting with an ST-
segment –elevation myocardial i nfarction is recom-
mended in select patients to improve outcomes.Percutaneous intervention of the nonculprit artery atthe time of primary percutan eous coronary interven-
tion is less clear and may be considered in stable pa-tients with uncomplicated r evascularization of the
culprit artery, low-complexity nonculprit artery dis-
ease, and normal renal function. In contrast, percu-
taneous intervention of the non-culprit artery can beh a r m f u li np a t i e n t si nc a r d i o g e n i cs h o c k .
9. Revascularization decisions in patients with diabetes
and multivessel coronary artery disease are optimizedby the use of a Heart Team approach. Patients withdiabetes who have triple-vessel disease should un-dergo surgical revascularization; percutaneous coro-
nary intervention may be considered if they are poor
candidates for surgery.
10. Treatment decisions for pa tients undergoing surgical
revascularization of coronary artery disease shouldinclude the calculation of a patient ’s surgical risk with
the Society of Thoracic Surgeons score. The usefulnessof the SYNTAX score calculation in treatment decisionsis less clear because of the interobserver variability in
its calculation and its absence of clinical variables.
PREAMBLE
Since 1980, the American College of Cardiology (ACC) and
American Heart Association (AHA) have translated scien-tiﬁc evidence into clinical practice guidelines with rec-
ommendations to improve cardiovascular health. Theseguidelines, which are based on systematic methods toevaluate and classify evidence, provide a foundation for
the delivery of quality cardiovascular care. The ACC andAHA sponsor the development and publication of clinicalpractice guidelines without commercial support, andmembers volunteer their time to the writing and review
efforts. Guidelines are of ﬁcial policy of the ACC and AHA.
For some guidelines, the ACC and AHA partner with otherorganizations.
Intended Use
Clinical practice guidelines provide recommendations
applicable to patients with or at risk of developing car-diovascular disease (CVD). The focus is on medical prac-tice in the United States, but these guidelines are relevantto patients throughout the world. Although guidelines
may be used to inform regulatory or payer decisions, the
intent is to improve quality of care and align with pa-tients ’interests. Guidelines are intended to de ﬁne prac-
tices meeting the needs of patients in most, but not all,circumstances and should not r eplace clinical judgment.
Clinical Implementation
Management, in accordance with guideline recommen-
dations, is effective only when followed by both practi-
tioners and patients. Adherence to recommendations can
be enhanced by shared decision-making between clini-cians and patients, with patient engagement in selectinginterventions on the basis of individual values, prefer-ences, and associated condi tions and comorbidities.
Methodology and Modernization
The ACC/AHA Joint Committee on Clinical Practice
Guidelines (Joint Committee) continuously reviews, up-
dates, and modi ﬁes guideline methodology on the basis of
published standards from or ganizations, including the
Institute of Medicine ( 1,2), and on the basis of internal
reevaluation. Similarly, presentation and delivery ofguidelines are reevaluated and modi ﬁed in response to
evolving technologies and other factors to optimallyfacilitate dissemination of information to health careprofessionals at the point of care.
Numerous modi ﬁcations to the guidelines have been
implemented to make them shorter and enhance “user-
friendliness. ”Guidelines are written and presented in a
modular, “knowledge chunk ”format, in which each
chunk includes a table of recommendations, a brief syn-opsis, recommendation-speci ﬁc supportive text and,
when appropriate, ﬂow diagrams or additional tables.
Hyperlinked references are provided for each modular
knowledge chunk to facilitate quick access and review.
In recognition of the importance of cost –value consid-
erations, in certain guidelines, when appropriate andfeasible, an analysis of value for a drug, device, orintervention may be performed in accordance withthe ACC/AHA methodology ( 3).JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee25

To ensure that guideline recommendations remain
current, new data will be reviewed on an ongoing basis bythe writing committee and staff. Going forward, targetedsections or knowledge chunks will be revised dynamicallyafter publication and timely peer review of potentially
practice-changing science. The previous designations of
“full revision ”and “focused update ”will be phased out.
For additional information and policies on guidelinedevelopment, readers may consult the ACC/AHA guide-line methodology manual ( 4) and other methodology ar-
ticles ( 5-7).
Selection of Writing Committee Members
The Joint Committee strives to ensure that the guideline
writing committee contains requisite content expertiseand is representative of the broader cardiovascular com-munity by selection of experts across a spectrum of
backgrounds, representing different geographic regions,
sexes, races, ethnicities, intellectual perspectives/biases,and clinical practice settings. Organizations and profes-sional societies with related interests and expertise areinvited to participate as partners or collaborators.
Relationships With Industry and Other Entities
The ACC and AHA have rigoro us policies and methods to
ensure that documents are developed without bias or
improper in ﬂuence. The complete policy on relationships
with industry and other entities (RWI) can be foundonline .Appendix 1 of the guideline lists writing com-
mittee members ’relevant RWI; for the purposes of full
transparency, their comprehensive disclosure informa-tion is available in a Supplemental Appendix .C o m p r e -
hensive disclosure information for the Joint Committee
is also available online .
Evidence Review and Evidence Review Committees
In developing recommendati ons, the writing committee
uses evidence-based methodologies that are based on allavailable data ( 4,5). Literature searches focus on ran-
domized controlled trials (RCTs) but also include regis-tries, nonrandomized comparative and descriptive
studies, case series, cohort studies, systematic reviews,
and expert opinion. Only key references are cited.
An independent evidence review committee is
commissioned when there are $1 questions deemed of
utmost clinical importance and merit formal systematicreview to determine which patients are most likely tobene ﬁt from a drug, device, or treatment strategy, and to
what degree. Criteria for commissioning an evidence re-
view committee and formal systematic review include
absence of a current authoritative systematic review,feasibility of de ﬁning the bene ﬁt and risk in a time frame
consistent with the writing of a guideline, relevance to asubstantial number of patients, and likelihood that theﬁndings can be translated into actionablerecommendations. Evidence review committee members
may include methodologists, epidemiologists, clinicians,and biostatisticians. Recommendations developed by thewriting committee on the basis of the systematic review aremarked
“SR”.
Guideline-Directed Management and Therapy
The term guideline-directed medical therapy (GDMT)
encompasses clinical evaluation, diagnostic testing, andboth pharmacological and procedural treatments. For
these and all recommended drug treatment regimens,
the reader should con ﬁrm dosage with product insert
material and evaluate for contraindications andinteractions. Recommendations are limited to drugs,devices, and treatments appr oved for clinical use in the
United States.
Patrick T. O ’Gara, MD, MACC, FAHA
Chair, ACC/AHA Joint Commi ttee on Clinical Practice
Guidelines
1. INTRODUCTION
1.1. Methodology and Evidence Review
The recommendations listed in this guideline are, when-
ever possible, evidence based. An initial extensive evi-
dence review, which included literature derived fromresearch involving human subj ects, published in English,
and indexed in the U.S. National Library of Medicine andthe National Center for Biotechnology information(through PubMed), EMBASE, the Cochrane Collaboration,CINHL Complete, and other sele cted databases relevant to
this guideline, was conducted from May 2019 to
September 2019. Key search words included but were not
limited to the following: percutaneous coronary interven-
tion,angioplasty ,coronary artery bypass graft (CABG)
surgery ,myocardial infarction ,cardiac surgery ,stent(s) ,
angiogram ,angiography ,percutaneous transluminal coro-
nary angioplasty ,coronary atherosclerosis ,saphenous vein
graft ,internal mammary artery (IMA) graft ,internal
thoracic artery graft ,arterial graft ,post-bypass ,non-ST
elevated myocardial infarction ,vein graft lesions ,
myocardial revascularization ,multivessel PCI ,a n d left
ventricular dysfunction . Additional relevant studies,
published through May 2021 during the guideline writingprocess, were also considered by the writing committeeand added to the evidence tables when appropriate. Theﬁnal evidence tables are included in the Online Data
Supplement and summarize the evidence used by the
writing committee to formulate recommendations. Ref-
erences selected and published in the present documentare representative and not all-inclusive.
1.2. Organization of the Writing Committee
The writing committee consisted of clinicians, general
cardiologists, interventional cardiologists, cardiac sur-
geons, a cardiac anesthesiologist, an advanced nurseLawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e26

TABLE 1 Associated Guidelines and Statements
Title OrganizationPublication Year
(Reference)
Guidelines
2017 AHA/ACC/HRS Guideline for Management of Patients With Ventricular Arrhythmias and the Prevention of
Sudden Cardiac DeathAHA/ACC/HRS 2017 ( 7)
2020 ACC/AHA Guideline for the Management of Patients With Valvular Heart Disease ACC/AHA 2020 ( 8)
2019 ACC/AHA Guideline on the Primary Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease ACC/AHA 2019 ( 9)
2016 ACC/AHA Guideline Focused Update on Duration of Dual Antiplatelet Therapy in Patients With Coronary
Artery Disease: A Report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force onClinical Practice Guidelines: An Update of the 2011 ACCF/AHA/SCAI Guideline for Percutaneous Coronary
Intervention, 2011 ACCF/AHA Guideline for Coronary Artery Bypass Graft Surgery, 2012 ACC/AHA/ACP/AATS/
PCNA/SCAI/STS Guideline for the Diagnosis and Management of Patients With Stable Ischemic Heart Disease,
2013 ACCF/AHA Guideline for the Management of ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction, 2014 AHA/ACC Guideline
for the Management of Patients With Non –ST-Elevation Acute Coronary Syndromes, and 2014 ACC/AHA
Guideline on Perioperative Cardiovascular Evaluation and Management of Patients Undergoing Noncardiac
SurgeryACC/AHA 2016 ( 10)
2018 AHA/ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/ADA/AGS/APhA/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Guideline on the Management of
Blood CholesterolAHA/ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/
ADA/AGS/APhA/ASPC/NLA/PCNA2019 ( 11)
2018 AHA/ACC Guideline for the Management of Adults With Congenital Heart Disease AHA/ACC 2019 ( 12)
2014 AHA/ACC/HRS Guideline for the Management of Patients With Atrial Fibrillation AHA/ACC/HRS 2014 ( 13)
Focused Update of the 2014 AHA/ACC/HRS Guideline for the Management of Patients With Atrial Fibrillation AHA/ACC/HRS 2019 ( 14)
ACCF/AHA/ASE/ASNC/HFSA/HRS/SCAI/SCCT/SCMR/STS 2013 Multimodality Appropriate Use Criteria for the
Detection and Risk Assessment of Stable Ischemic Heart DiseaseACCF/AHA/ASE/ASNC/HFSA/
HRS/SCAI/SCCT/SCMR/STS2014 ( 15)
ACC/AHA/SCAI Focused Update on Primary Percutaneous Coronary Intervention for Patients With ST-Elevation
Myocardial Infarction: An Update of the 2011 ACCF/AHA/SCAI Guideline for Percutaneous Coronary Intervention
and the 2013 ACCF/AHA Guideline for the Management of ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction
nLevine et al., 2016 ACC/AHA/SCAI Focused Update on P rimary Percutaneous Coronary Intervention for
Patients With ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction, is now replaced and retired by the present 2021
guideline.ACC/AHA 2016 ( 3)
2014 AHA/ACC Guideline for the Management of Patients With Non –ST-Elevation Acute Coronary Syndromes AHA/ACC 2014 ( 6)
2013 ACCF/AHA Guideline for the Management of ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction: A Report of the American
College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice GuidelinesACCF/AHA 2013 ( 5)
2013 ACCF/AHA Guideline for the Management of Heart Failure ACCF/AHA 2013 ( 16)
2017 ACC/AHA/HFSA Focused Update of the 2013 ACCF/AHA Guideline for the Management of Heart Failure ACC/AHA/HFSA 2017 ( 17)
2011 ACCF/AHA Guideline for Coronary Artery Bypass Graft Surgery
nHillis et al., 2011 ACCF/AHA Guideline for Coronary Artery Bypass Graft Surgery, is now replaced and retired
by the present 2021 guideline.ACCF/AHA 2011( 1)
2011 ACCF/AHA/SCAI Guideline for Percutaneous Coronary Intervention
nLevine et al., 2013 ACCF/AHA/SCAI Guideline for Percutaneous Coronary Intervention, is now replaced and
retired by the present 2021 guideline.ACCF/AHA/SCAI 2013 ( 2)
2017 AHA/ACC/HRS Guideline for Management of Patients With Ventricular Arrhythmias and the Prevention of
Sudden Cardiac DeathAHA/ACC/HRS 2018 ( 7)
2017 ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/ASPC/NMA/PCNA Guideline for the Prevention, Detection,
Evaluation, and Management of High Blood Pressure in AdultsACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/AGS/APhA/
ASH/ASPC/NMA/PCNA2018 ( 18)
2012 ACCF/AHA/ACP/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS Guideline for the Diagnosis and Management of Patients with Stable
Ischemic Heart DiseaseACCF/AHA/ACP/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS 2012 ( 4)
Statements
2018 ACC Expert Consensus Decision Pathway on Tobacco Cessation Treatment ACC 2018 ( 19)
Clinical Practice Guideline Treating Tobacco Use and Dependence 2008 Update Panel, Liaisons, and Staff: A Clinical
Practice Guideline for Treating Tobacco Use and Dependence: 2008 Update: A U.S. Public Health Service ReportU.S. Public Health Service report 2008 ( 20)
AATS Expert Consensus Review on Prevention and Management of Sternal Wound Infections AATS 2016 ( 21)
2018 ACC/AHA Clinical Performance and Quality Measures for Cardiac Rehabilitation ACC/AHA 2018 ( 22)
Spontaneous Coronary Artery Dissection: Current State of the Science AHA 2018 ( 23)
Contemporary Management of Cardiogenic Shock AHA 2017 ( 24)
Secondary Prevention After Coronary Artery Bypass Graft Surgery: A Scienti ﬁc Statement From the American Heart
AssociationAHA 2015 ( 25)
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment: Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes —2018 ADA 2018 ( 26)
AACVPR indicates American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation; AAPA, American Association of Physician Assistants; AATS , American Association for Thoracic Surgery;
ABC, Association of Black Cardiologists; ACC, American College of Cardiology; ACCF, American College of Cardiology Foundation; ACP, American Coll ege of Physicians; ACPM, American College of
Preventive Medicine; ADA, American Diabetes Association; AGS, American Geriatrics Society; AHA, American Heart Association; APhA, American Publ ic Health Association; ASE, American Society of
Echocardiography; ASH, American Society of Hypertension; ASNC, American Society of Nuclear Cardiology; ASPC, American Society for Preventive Car diology; HFSA, Heart Failure Society of
America; HRS, Heart Rhythm Society; NLA, National Lipid Association; NMA, National Medical Association; PCNA, Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses A ssociation; SCAI, Society for Cardiovascular
Angiography and Interventions; SCCT, Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography; SCMR, Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance; and ST S, Society of Thoracic Surgeons.JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee27

practitioner, and 2 lay/patient representatives. The
writing committee included representatives from theACC, AHA, Society for Cardiovascular Angiographyand Interventions (SCAI), American Association forThoracic Surgery, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons
(STS). Appendix 1 of the present document lists writing
committee members ’relevant RWI. For the purposes of
full transparency, the writing committee members ’
comprehensive disclosure information is available in aSupplemental Appendix .1.3. Document Review and Approval
This document was reviewed by 2 of ﬁcial reviewers each
nominated by the ACC and AHA; 1 reviewer each from theACC, AHA, STS, American Association for Thoracic Sur-gery, and SCAI; and 31 individual content reviewers. Re-
viewers ’RWI information was distributed to the writing
committee and is published in Appendix 2 .
The present document was approved for publica-
tion by the governing bodies of the ACC, AHA, andSCAI.TABLE 2Applying ACC/AHA Class of Recommendation and Level of Evidence to Clinical Strategies, Interventions, Treatments, or Diag-
nostic Testing in Patient Care (Updated May 2019)*
Lawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e28

1.4. Scope of the Guideline
The scope of the “2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Guideline for
Coronary Artery Revascularization ”is to provide an
update to and to consolidate the 2011 coronary artery
bypass graft (CABG) surgery ( 1) and the 2011 and
2015 percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) guidelines(2,3), with the added consideration of using a patient-
centric disease approach. The applicable sections onrevascularization from the 2012 stable ischemic heartdisease (SIHD) guideline ( 4), as well as the 2013
ST-segment –elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) ( 5)
and 2014 non –ST-segment –elevation myocardial infarc-
tion (NSTEMI) guidelines ( 6), will also be updated.
This present guideline will affect the followingdocuments:
1. Replace/retire the 2011 PCI guideline ( 2).
2. Replace/retire the 2011 CABG guideline ( 1).
3. Replace/retire the 2015 update in PCI in STEMI guide-
line ( 3).
4. Replace/retire the 2013 STEMI guideline, Sections 4.1 ,
4.2,4.3,4.4,5.3(deals with transfer after lytic with
intent to do PCI), 6.2,6.4,7.1,and 7.2(5).
5. Replace/retire 2014 non –ST-segment –elevation acute
coronary syndrome (NSTE-ACS) guideline, Sections
4.4.4 ,5.1.1 ,5.1.2.1 ,5.1.2.2 ,5.1.2.3, and 5.2(6).
6. Replace/retire the 2012 SIHD guideline, Section 5 (4).
The intended primary target audience consists of car-
diovascular clinicians who are involved in the care ofpatients for whom revascularization is considered orindicated. Coronary arte ry disease (CAD) is to be
approached with the most current treatment options andtreated as a “condition. ”Recommendations are stated in
reference to the patients and their condition. The focus is
t op r o v i d et h em o s tu p - t o - d a t ee v i d e n c et oi n f o r mt h e
clinician during shared decision-making with the patient.
Although the document is not intended to be aprocedural-based manual of recommendations that out-lines the best practice for coronary revascularization,there are certain techniques that surgeons or interven-tional cardiologists might use that are associated withimproved clinical outcomes.
In developing the 2021 coronary artery revasculariza-
tion guideline, the writing committee reviewed previ-
ously published guidelines and related statements.Table 1 contains a list of these publications and state-
ments deemed pertinent to this writing effort and isintended for use as a resource, thus obviating the need torepeat existing guideline recommendations.
1.5. Class of Recommendation and Level of Evidence
The Class of Recommendation (COR) indicates the
strength of recommendation, encompassing theestimated magnitude and certainty of bene ﬁti np r o p o r -
tion to risk. The Level of Evidence (LOE) rates the qualityof scienti ﬁc evidence supporting the intervention on the
basis of the type, quantity, and consistency of data fromclinical trials and other sources ( Table 2 )(1).
1.6. Abbreviations
Abbreviation Meaning/Phrase
ACS acute coronary syndrome
AKI acute kidney injury
AMI acute myocardial infarctionAVR aortic valve replacementBIMA bilateral internal mammary arteryBMS bare-metal stent
CABG coronary artery bypass graft
CAD coronary artery diseaseCKD chronic kidney diseaseCOR Class of RecommendationCTO chronic total occlusionCVD cardiovascular disease
DAPT dual antiplatelet therapy
DES drug-eluting stentECG electrocardiogramFFR fractional ﬂow reserve
GDMT guideline-directed medical therapy
iFR instantaneous wave-free ratio
IMA internal mammary arteryISR in-stent restenosisIVUS intravascular ultrasoundLAD left anterior descending
LIMA left internal mammary artery
LOE Level of EvidenceMACE major adverse cardiovascular eventsMI myocardial infarctionNSTE-ACS non –ST-segment –elevation acute coronary syndrome
NSTEMI non –ST-segment –elevation myocardial infarction
OCT optical coherence tomography
PCI percutaneous coronary interventionRCT randomized controlled trialSCAD spontaneous coronary artery dissectionSIHD stable ischemic heart disease
STEMI ST-segment –elevation myocardial infarction
SVG saphenous vein graftSYNTAX Synergy Between PCI With TAXUS and Cardiac SurgeryTAVR transcatheter aortic valve replacementUFH unfractionated heparinVT ventricular tachycardiaJACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee29

2. IMPROVING EQUITY OF CARE IN
REVASCULARIZATION AND SHAREDDECISION-MAKING
2.1. Improving Equity of Care in Revascularization
Synopsis
Health disparities by sex and race are evident across
the spectrum of CVD in the United States ( 7,9,13-15 ), and
mounting evidence demonstrates that social factors are
strongly associated with cardiovascular health outcomes
(16,17). Differences in access to care, cardiovascular
treatment, mortality rate, and readmission outcomes
persist by important sociode mographic characteristics
that include but are not limited to socioeconomic status,race, and ethnicity ( 18-22 ). African Americans ( 23-25 ),
Hispanics ( 24), and South Asians ( 26) (with substantial
heterogeneity within Asian subgroups) have a higher
prevalence of cardiovascular risk factors and crude mor-
tality ( 16). Although access to health care remains a
problem, even after entering into the health care system,women and non-White patients are less likely to receivereperfusion therapy, an invasive strategy, or revasculari-zation ( 9,13,27-37 ) and more likely to have worse out-
comes ( 37-40 ). As compared with White male patients,
women and Black patients with acute coronary syndrome
(ACS) receive less guideline-based therapy in hospital and
at discharge ( 27,32,41,42). Differences in comorbidities,
health education, presentation, socioeconomic status,regional hospital capability and quality, and insurancea n dh e a l t hc a r ea c c e s s( 15,28,29,35,37,43-48 )c o n t r i b u t et o
the problem, but disparities can persist despite adjust-ment for these factors ( 7,30-32 ,49,50). In a study of pa-
tients with cardiac symptoms, clinicians were less likely
to recommend cardiac catheterization to women and non-
White patients than to White male patients, despite beingg i v e nt h ee x a c ts a m ec l i n i c a lv i g n e t t ef o rW h i t em a l epatients ( 51). Continued vigilance against conscious and
unconscious gender, racial, and ethnic discrimination andpurposeful efforts to increase the implementation ofguideline-based therapy for all patients, regardless of sex,
race, or ethnicity, are needed.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
After controlling for greater baseline comorbidities
among patients undergoing revascularization, severalobservational studies have demonstrated that Black
(28,52-54 ), Hispanic ( 24,50
), and Asian ( 55,56)p a t i e n t s
have outcomes similar to those of White patients. Simi-larly, after controlling for baseline comorbidities and
treatment strategy, most st udies demonstrate similar
outcomes in women and men ( 1-6). Post hoc analyses of
randomized trials evaluating revascularization providecompelling evidence, inasmuch as enrolled patients aremore similar and the decision to revascularize is protocoldriven. In the SHOCK (Should We Emergently Revascu-larize Occluded Coronaries for Cardiogenic Shock) trial,revascularization rates were lowest and mortality rates
highest for Hispanics and African Americans, but there
was no interaction between race and the mortality bene ﬁt
of revascularization ( 9). Similar results have been re-
ported for women with shock in the CULPRIT-SHOCK(Culprit Lesion Only PCI versus Multivessel PCI inCardiogenic Shock trial ( 57). In the TACTICS-TIMI 18
(Treat Angina With Aggrastat and Determine Cost ofTherapy With Invasive or Conservative Strategy —Throm-
bolysis In Myocardial Infarction 18) trial, evaluating pa-
tients with NSTE-ACS, non-White patients and femalepatients had more comorbidity and more major adversecardiovascular event (MACE) outcomes than White andmale patients but were revascularized at the same rate.After adjustment for baseline characteristics, the invasivestrategy was equally bene ﬁcial for all patients, without
evidence of racial differences ( 10). A meta-analysis of RCT
of invasive vs conservative strategies in women and men
with NSTE-ACS reported a similar proportional bene ﬁto f
an invasive strategy in women and men, (although lowrisk women with biomarker negative ACS did not derive abene ﬁt to an early invasive strategy)( 1). Additionally,
studies have shown similar relative bene ﬁts of primary
PCI ( 3) and revascularization in SIHD ( 5,6)f o rw o m e na n d
men. In view of these ﬁndings, the decision to offer
revascularization should be made on the basis of a pa-
tient ’s clinical characteristics, and preferences and should
be the same for all patients, regardless of sex, race, orethnicity.R e c o m m e n d a t i o nt oI m p r o v eE q u i t yo fC a r ei nR e v a s c u l a r i z a t i o n
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized in Online Data Supplement 1 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
1 B-NR1. In patients who require coronary revascularizatio n, treatment decisions should be based on clinical
indication, regardless of sex ( 1-7)o rr a c eo re t h n i c i t y( 8-10 ), and efforts to reduce disparities of care are
warranted ( 11,12).Lawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e30

2.2. Shared Decision-Making and Informed Consent
Synopsis
Shared decision-making ( Figure 1 ) is a collaborative
approach that provides patients with unbiased, evidence-based information on treatment choices and encourages adialogue between patients and providers, with the aim ofmaking decisions that use scienti ﬁc evidence and align
with the patient ’s values and preferences ( 3,4,6). It is
essential that the clinician u se terminology that the pa-
tient understands to allow effective processing of health
information and to foster the patient ’s participation in
treatment decisions ( 7). The use of online modules, de-
cision aids, or videos about treatment options can helppatients better understand the risks and bene ﬁts of
various therapies. Patients are interested in how a rec-ommended treatment might impact their prognosis andquality of life ( 8). In the treatment decision-making pro-
cess, the patient ’s best interest should be placed ﬁrst, and
the active participation of the patient and signi ﬁcant
others should be engaged. The contributions of socialdeterminants of health to CVD are poorly understood(9,10) but may impact a patient ’s decision with regard to
treatments. In high-income countries, 4 socioeconomic
status metrics have been associated with CVD: incomelevel, educational attainment, employment status, and
environmental factors ( 11-13 ).
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Shared decision-making i s vital to patient-centered
care. Shared decision-making improves patients ’un-
derstanding of treatment op tions, increases realistic
expectations of bene ﬁts and harms, stimulates
engagement in decision-making, and improvesconcordance between patients ’values and treatment
choices ( 14-17 ). Factors complicating effective shared
decision-making include low health literacy, adversesocial determinants of health, cultural beliefs,language barriers, advanced age, and complex comor-
bidities. Health literacy is associated with socioeco-nomic position, English pro ﬁciency, and the
development of general literacy ( 18). Incorporating a
patient ’s preferences into the decision-making process
improves the patient ’s well-being through better
treatment adherence and higher satisfaction withhealth outcomes ( 5,19,20). A patient ’s right to decline
recommended treatments must be respected and
should be acknowledged in a written document afterthe patient has received suf ﬁcient information from
the Heart Team ( 8
).
2. Patients cannot engage in shared decision-making until
they know the potential bene ﬁts and risks of all treat-
ment options. Clinicians mu st provide evidence-based
estimates of risks, bene ﬁts, and costs of therapeutic
options ( 8,21,22). Procedure-related and long-term
risks and bene ﬁts, such as survival, quality of life,
and the need for late reintervention, should beincluded in such discussions ( Table 3 )(8). Patients
should also be educated about the need for continuedmedical therapy with or without revascularization, as
well as lifestyle modi ﬁcation and other secondary
prevention strategies ( 21,23). In some situations, in
which the optimal treatment strategy is uncertain, itmay be appropriate to defer revascularization to allowtime for consultation and discussion. The clinicianmust act in the patient ’s best interest and convey the
risks and bene ﬁts of all revascularization treatment
options, consult with additional specialists when
appropriate, and allow the patient to consult family
(24,25). Challenges exist when scienti ﬁc data support a
treatment, but the patient prefers an alternativetreatment; in 1 study, patients preferred PCI overCABG, even when the risk of death with PCI was doublethe risk with CABG ( 26).Recommendations for Shared Decision-Making and Informed Consent
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 C-LD1. In patients undergoing revascularizat ion, decisions should be patient centered —that is, considerate of the
patient ’s preferences and goals, cultural beliefs, health literacy, and social determinants of health —and
made in collaboration with the patient ’s support system ( 1,2).
1 C-LD2. In patients undergoing coronary angiography or r evascularization, adequate information about bene ﬁts,
risks, therapeutic consequences, and potential alt ernatives in the performance of percutaneous and
surgical myocardial revascularization s hould be given, when feasible, with suf ﬁcient time for informed
decision-making to improve clinical outcomes ( 3-5).JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee31

FIGURE 1 Shared Decision-Making Algorithm
TABLE 3 Ideal Components of the Shared Decision-Making and Informed Consent Process
Patient-Centered Care
Assess a patient ’s ability to understand complex health information
Seek support of family/others
Elicit and respect cultural, racial, ethnic, or religious preferences and valuesEvaluate social determinants of health (education, income, access to health care)Improve telephone/telemedicine accessDiscuss treatment alternatives and how each affects the patient ’s quality of life
Shared Decision-Making
Encourage questions and explain the patient ’s role in the decision-making partnership
Clearly and accurately communicate the potential risks and bene ﬁts of a particular procedure and alternative treatments
Ensure that patients have a key role in deciding what revascularization approach is appropriateUse shared decision aids:
-Alphabetical List of Decision Aids by Health Topic, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute ( https://decisionaid.ohri.ca/implement.html )(27)
-SHARE Approach Curriculum Tools, Agency for Health care Research and Quality ( https://www.ahrq.gov/health-literacy/curriculum-tools/shareddecisionmaking/
tools/tool-1/index.html )(28)
Spend suf ﬁcient time to engage in shared decision-making; allow for a second opinion
Work with a chaplain, social worker, or other team members to facilitate shared decision-makingEncourage patients to share their fears, stress, or other emotions, and address appropriatelyNegotiate decision in partnership with the patient and family members
Respect patient ’s autonomy to decline recommended treatment
Continued in the next columnLawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e32

3. PREPROCEDURAL ASSESSMENT AND THE
HEART TEAM
3.1. The Heart Team
Synopsis
The multidisciplinary Heart Team, which involves the
cardiologist, cardiac surgeon, and other specialists, hasbecome a critical component of the revascularization de-
cision. Initially, the Heart Team approach to decision-
making for coronary disease arose within the context ofrandomized trials comparing PCI with CABG to ensureselected patients were equally suited for either strategybefore randomization ( 8). Subsequently, the Heart Team
has become an important paradigm in clinical practice,emphasizing the importance of team consensus on theoptimal approach to revascularization. Ideal situations for
Heart Team consideration include patients with complex
coronary disease, comorbid conditions that could impactthe success of the revascularization strategy, and otherclinical or social situations that may impact outcomes(F i g u r e2a n dT a b l e4 ). The Heart Team process should rest
on the principles of collegiality, mutual respect, andcommitment to excellence. The logistics of convening theHeart Team should depend on local resources and work-
ﬂows. Models include daily to weekly scheduled meetings
a n da dh o ca c t i v a t i o n( 1,2,4,6,9). Remote conferenceshave also been advocated ( 9). Additionally, there should
be a process for rapid activation of the Heart Team forurgent or emergency clinical situations.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁcS u p p o r t i n gT e x t
1. Observational studies using the Heart Team have
included interventional cardiology, cardiac surgery,and noninvasive cardiologists ( 1-4,6). Additional pro-
fessionals who offer input may include the patient ’s
primary physician, as well as palliative care, criticalcare, anesthesiology, and imaging specialists. Obser-
vational studies have demonstrated favorable out-
comes when the Heart Team was used in cases ofunprotected left main disea se, triple-vessel disease,
double-vessel disease involving the proximal leftanterior descending (LAD) art ery, or single-vessel dis-
ease involving the proximal LAD artery in the contextof diabetes, or in cases in which the referring physicianrequested such evaluation ( 5-7,10,11). Heart Team de-
cisions are generally reproducible ( 4) and associated
with good outcomes ( 2,6).TABLE 3 Continued
Consent Procedures
Use plain language, avoiding jargon, and adopt the patient ’s words; integrate pictures to teach
Document teach-back of patient ’s knowledge and understanding
Conduct conversations with a trained interpreter, as neededProvide patient-speci ﬁc short- and long-term risks, bene ﬁts, and alternative treatments
Provide unbiased, evidence-based, reliable, accessible, and relevant information to patient
Discuss speci ﬁc risks and bene ﬁts with regard to survival, relief of angina, quality of life, and potential additional intervention, as well as uncertainties associated with
different treatment strategies
Provide patient time to re ﬂect on the trade-offs imposed by the outcome estimates
Provide information on the level of operator expertise, volume of the facility, and local results in the performance of coronary revascularization o ptions
Clearly inform of the need for continued medical therapy and lifestyle modi ﬁcations
Recommendation for the Heart Team
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized in Online Data Supplement 2 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
1 B-NR1. In patients for whom the optimal treatment strategy is unclear, a Heart Team approach that includes
representatives from interventional cardiology, car diac surgery, and clinical cardiology is recommended
to improve patient outcomes ( 1-7).JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee33

FIGURE 2 Phases of Patient-Centric Care in the Treatment of Coronary Artery Disease
CV indicates cardiovascular; SIHD, stable ischemic heart disease; and STEMI, ST-segment –elevation myocardial infarction.
TABLE 4 Factors for Consideration by the Heart Team
Coronary Anatomy
-Left main disease
-Multivessel disease
-High anatomic complexity (i.e., bifurcation disease, high SYNTAX score)
Comorbidities
-Diabetes
-Systolic dysfunction
-Coagulopathy
-Valvular heart disease
-Frailty
-Malignant neoplasm
-End-stage renal disease
-Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
-Immunosuppression
-Debilitating neurological disorders
-Liver disease/cirrhosis
-Prior CVA
-Calciﬁed/porcelain aorta
-Aortic aneurysm
Continued in the next columnTABLE 4 Continued
Procedural Factors
-Local and regional outcomes
-Access site for PCI
-Surgical risk
-PCI risk
Patient Factors
-Unstable presentation or shock
-Patient preferences
-Inability or unwillingness to adhere to DAPT
-Patient social support
-Religious beliefs
-Patient education, knowledge, and understanding
CVA indicates cerebrovascular accident; DAPT, dual antiplatelet therapy; PCI, percuta-
neous coronary intervention; and SYNTAX, Synergy Between PCI With TAXUS andCardiac Surgery.Lawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e34

3.2. Predicting Patient Risk of Death With CABG
Synopsis
The STS risk score is designed to predict adverse out-
comes in patients undergoing CABG, including the risk ofdeath, renal failure, permanent stroke, prolonged venti-lation, deep sternal wound infection, reoperation, andprolonged length of stay. The STS risk score is derived
from data on patients undergoing CABG in the United
States. The STS score is periodically updated to re ﬂect
new risk models for CABG, with the most recent updatein 2018 based on the Adult Cardiac Surgery Databasefrom 2011 –2014 ( 3,4). Similar to the STS score, the Euro-
pean System for Cardiac Operative Risk Evaluation(EuroSCORE) II, developed in 2011, is designed to predictadverse outcomes in patients undergoing isolated
CABG ( 5).
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supporting Text
1. The STS risk score has been validated in several studies
and demonstrates excellent predictive value for esti-mating risk of adverse events ( 2-4). The STS risk score
serves as a useful tool when a choice is being madeamong various treatment strategies because it allows
the clinician, the patient, and the patient ’sf a m i l yt o
have a reasonable estimate of operative risk. The STSrisk score performs better than the EuroSCORE II for thepatient population with CABG, particularly at higher(>5%) predicted mortality rates ( 1,2). Commonly used
cardiac surgery risk models, such as the STS andEuroSCORE II, are limited in assessing the in ﬂuence of
risk factors, including cirrh osis, frailty, and malnutri-
tion, on outcome. Patients with liver cirrhosis, frailty,
and malnutrition have increased risk of perioperativemorbidity and mortality after cardiac surgery ( 6-17)a n d
m a yb ea s s e s s e db yo t h e rt o o l s( Table 5 ).
4. DEFINING LESION SEVERITY
4.1. Angiography to De ﬁne Anatomy and Assess Lesion
Severity
Coronary angiography rem ains the default method to
deﬁne coronary anatomy and characterize the severity
of coronary arterial stenos es. A visually estimated
diameter stenosis severity of $70% for non –left main
disease and $50% for left main disease has been used
to de ﬁne signi ﬁcant stenosis and to guide revasculari-
zation strategy. Although the length of a lesion maycontribute to physiological lesion severity (i.e., a longermoderate lesion may result in more ischemia than afocal severe lesion), there are no standard cutoffs forlesion length used to classify a severe stenosis. An an-giographically intermediate coronary stenosis is de ﬁned
as a diameter stenosis severity of 40% to 69%, and
generally warrants additional investigation to assess
physiological signi ﬁcance. There is controversy overRecommendation for Predicting Patient Risk of Death With CABG
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized in Online Data Supplements 3 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
1 B-NR1. In patients who are being considered for CABG, cal culation of the STS risk score is recommended to help
stratify patient risk ( 1,2).
TABLE 5Assessment of Risk Factors Not Quanti ﬁed in the
STS Score
Risk Factor Assessment Tool
Cirrhosis Model for End-Stage Liver Disease (MELD) score ( 1-6)
Frailty Gait speed ( 8,10-14 ,16)
Malnutrition Malnutrition Universal Screening Tool (MUST) ( 7,9,15,16)
STS indicates Society of Thoracic Surgeons.JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee35

whether visually estimated diameter stenosis or quan-
titative coronary angiograph y better predicts the func-
tional signi ﬁcance of a coronary stenosis ( 1,2). The
difference in mean diameter stenosis between quanti-tative coronary angiography and visual estimation var-
ies from 10% to 20% and is dependent on stenosis
severity ( 3-5). The use of optimal angiographic pro-jections, multiple angiographic views, and adjunct im-
aging or physiology may aid in the assessment ofcoronary anatomy when coronary angiography is used.
4.2. De ﬁning Coronary Artery Lesion Complexity: Calculation of
the SYNTAX (Synergy Between PCI With TAXUS andCardiac Surgery) Score
Recommendation for De ﬁning Coronary Artery Lesion Complexity: Calculation of the SYNTAX Score
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized in Online Data Supplement 4 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
2b B-NR1. In patients with multivessel CAD, an assessment of CAD complexity, such as the SYNTAX score, may be
useful to guide revascularization ( 1-4).
Synopsis
The anatomic complexity of lesions, expected
completeness of revascularization, predicted risk of death,and other adverse outcomes are important factors toconsider for determining the type of revascularization for
patients with CAD. Many factors contribute to the esti-
mation of the complexity of CAD ( Table 6 ). The SYNTAX
score was prospectively derived from the SYNTAX trial toaid in this decision-making process by providing anobjective measure to grade the anatomic complexity ofCAD in patients with multivessel disease ( 1). Its value as
an independent predictor of long-term major adversecardiac and cerebrovascular events and death was estab-
lished in the SYNTAX trial cohort and subsequently vali-
dated in external studies of patients treated with PCI butnot CABG ( 2-4). The SYNTAX II score and the revised
SYNTAX Score II 2020 was retrospectively developed fromthe SYNTAX trial cohort ( 5,6) to incorporate clinical vari-
ables in addition to the anatomic variables. These scoresdemonstrate modest discrimination in predicting adverseclinical events after revascularization ( 6).
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supporting Text
1. The SYNTAX score remains the most widely used and
v a l i d a t e dr i s ks c o r et og u i d et h ec h o i c eo fr e v a s c u l a r i -
zation in patients with mult ivessel disease. Importantlimitations of this score include the cumbersome
scoring system required for each lesion and the inter-observer variability in its calculation ( 7,8). Additionally,
the absence of clinical vari ables limits its use in esti-
mating the risk of clinical events after CABG. When
estimating a patient ’s complexity of disease, it is
important to consider variables that contribute to dis-ease complexity which might impact the success andoutcomes of revascularization ( Table 6 ).
TABLE 6Angiographic Features Contributing to Increasing
Complexity of CAD
Multivessel disease
Left main or proximal LAD artery lesion
Chronic total occlusion
Trifurcation lesionComplex bifurcation lesionHeavy calci ﬁcation
Severe tortuosityAorto-ostial stenosis
Diffusely diseased and narrowed segments distal to the lesion
Thrombotic lesionLesion length >20 mm
CAD indicates coronary artery disease; and LAD, left anterior descending.Lawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e36

4.3. Use of Coronary Physiology to Guide Revascularization
With PCI
Synopsis
FFR and iFR are 2 of the most commonly used physi-
ological methods of assessing lesion signi ﬁcance. FFR is
deﬁned as the ratio of maximal blood ﬂow in a region
distal to a lesion compared with the normal maximalblood ﬂow of an artery. iFR, an index of lesion severity, is
the instantaneous wave-free ratio (in diastole) of coronarypressure distal to the coronary lesion (Pd) to the aorticpressure (Pa) The potential advantage of iFR, which is aresting physiological index, is that it obviates the use ofadenosine because it does not require a state of maximal
hyperemia. These 2 measures —FFR and iFR —have been
s t u d i e di nr a n d o m i z e dt r i a l sw i t hc l i n i c a le n d p o i n t so fdeath, myocardial infarction (MI), or repeat revasculari-zation ( 1-5). There are other resting indices that have been
compared with iFR or FFR in observational studies ( 9,10).
These resting indices have v arying degrees of accuracy
relative to FFR and iFR but have not been studied inrandomized trials with clinical endpoints. The FAME 2
(Fractional Flow-Reserve-Guided PCI versus Medical
Therapy in Stable Coronary Disease) trial ( 2)t e s t e da
strategy of PCI for all lesions with abnormal FFRcompared with optimal medical therapy alone. Recruit-ment into the trial was stopped early because of a sig-niﬁcant bene ﬁt of PCI over medical therapy in patients
with an abnormal FFR with respect to death, MI, or urgentrevascularization, with the bene ﬁt derived largely from a
reduction in ischemia-driven revascularization.
The role of FFR in guiding surgical revascularization is
uncertain. Multiple small observational studies, as well asRCTs and meta-analyses of thes e trials, suggest that fewer
distal anastomoses are performed, and off-pump CABG ism o r eo f t e nc h o s e ni np a t i e n t su n d e r g o i n gC A B Gw i t hFFR-guided revascularization than in those undergoingCABG with angiogram-guided revascularization ( 11-14 ).
However, in these studies, no differences were found in
clinical outcomes in patien ts undergoing CABG with FFR
guidance compared with patients undergoing CABG withangiogram guidance ( 11-14 ). Additionally, not all studiesincluded an angiogram-guid ed comparison group. Large,
randomized trials that are a ppropriately powered are
warranted to guide the use of FFR in patients undergoing
surgical revascularization.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁcS u p p o r t i v eT e x t
1. In the FAME trial, PCI for a stenosis $50% with an
abnormal FFR reduced the risk of the composite
endpoint at 1 year as compared with PCI guided by
a n g i o g r a p h yo n l y( 1), a bene ﬁt that was maintained at 2
years ( 9) but not at 5 years. The DEFINE-FLAIR (Func-
tional Lesion Assessment of Intermediate Stenosis toGuide Revascularisation and the Instantaneous Wave-free Ratio versus Fractional Flow Reserve in Patientswith Stable Angina Pectoris or Acute Coronary Syn-drome) ( 4) and the iFR-SWEDEHEART (Instantaneous
Wave-free Ratio versus Fractional Flow Reserve in Pa-
tients with Stable Angina Pectoris or Acute CoronarySyndrome) trials ( 6) compared outcomes with the use
of iFR- or FFR-guided PCI. In these trials, iFR-guidedPCI was found to be noninferior to FFR-guided PCI.A sc o m p a r e dw i t hF F R ,t h eu s eo fi F Rw a sa s s o c i a t e dwith lower rates of procedure-related chest pain andshorter procedural time. In randomized trials, the rates
of short- and long-term MACE were lower among pa-
tients who had PCI guided by physiology with eitherFFR or iFR ( 4,6).
2. Deferral of PCI when the FFR is >0.80 or the iFR is
>0.89 is associated with low rates of long-term MACE
(8-10 ). The DEFER (Deferral of Percutaneous Interven-
tion) trial demonstrated similar rates of MACE in
follow-up when PCI for angiographic intermediate le-
sions and FFR >0.75 was deferred, rather than per-
f o r m e d ,a t2a n d5y e a r so ff o l l o w - u p( 8). Additionally,
there were lower rates of MI in the deferred group atlong-term follow-up ( 7). In patients enrolled in the
FAME trial who had an FFR >0.80, 2-year rates of MI
and revascularization were low, at 0.2% and 3.2%,respectively ( 9). Finally, in the DEFINE-FLAIR and theRecommendations for the Use of Coronary Physiology to Guide Revascularization With PCI
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplement 5 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1A1. In patients with angina or an anginal equivalent, un documented ischemia, and angiographically inter-
mediate stenoses, the use of fractional ﬂow reserve (FFR) or instantaneous wave-free ratio (iFR) is
recommended to guide the decision to proceed with PCI ( 1-6).
3: No bene ﬁt B-R2. In stable patients with angiograph ically intermediate stenoses and FFR >0.80 or iFR >0.89, PCI should
not be performed ( 7-10 ).JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee37

iFR-SWEDEHEART trials, rates of MACE in patients
who had PCI deferred on the basis of an FFR >0.80 or
an iFR >0.89 were 4.05% and 4.12%, respectively ( 10),
with unplanned revascularization being the mostfrequent cause of MACE. The cutoffs of FFR and iFR
provided were those used in the clinical trials. Onoccasion, borderline values may warrant further
ischemia testing or additional investigations.
4.4. Intravascular Ultrasound to Assess Lesion Severity
Recommendation for Intravascular Ultrasound to Assess Lesion Severity
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized in Online Data Supplement 6 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
2a B-NR1. In patients with intermediate stenosis of the left main artery, intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) is
reasonable to help de ﬁne lesion severity ( 1-5).
Synopsis
IVUS can offer important anatomic information beyond
what is seen on coronary angiog raphy. IVUS is particularly
useful in lesions involving the left main artery where theremay be limitations in corona ry angiography due to over-
lapping vessels or foreshortening. IVUS offers signi ﬁcantly
greater spatial resolution than angiography alone (IVUS
axial resolution is 100 to 150
mm, and coronary angiog-
raphy axial resolution is 300 mm). Detailed cross-sectional
images provide accurate evaluation of lesion characteris-tics, including lumen dimensi ons, lesion length, plaque
morphology and location, thrombus, dissection, and stentapposition and expansion. Additionally, minimal lumenarea on IVUS has been shown to correlate with physio-
logical indices ( 6).
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. In the case of indeterminate left main disease, studies
have shown that IVUS evaluation with deferral ofintervention for a minimum lumen area of $6t o7 . 5
mm
2is safe ( 1,2), although a smaller cutoff (4.5 –4.8
mm2) may be more appropriate in patients of Asian
descent ( 3). Moderate correlations between FFR values
and IVUS minimal lumen area cutoffs have beendemonstrated in left main disease ( 4,5). Compared with
the left main artery, smaller cutoffs have been sug-
gested for IVUS of the LAD artery ( 7). Developed more
recently, optical coherence tomography (OCT) has beenshown to correlate well with IVUS measurements ( 8).
However, because OCT requires blood clearance, itseffectiveness for imaging ostial left main disease islimited.
5. REVASCULARIZATION IN STEMI
5.1. Revascularization of the Infarct Artery in Patients With
STEMI
Recommendations for Revascularization of the Infarct Artery in Patients With STEMI
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplement 7 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1A1. In patients with STEMI and ischemic symptoms for <12 hours, PCI should be performed to improve survival
(1-5).
1 B-R2. In patients with STEMI and cardiogenic shock or hemodynamic instability, PCI or CABG (when PCI is not
feasible) is indicated to improve survival, irrespective of the time delay from MI onset ( 6,7).
1 B-NR3. In patients with STEMI who have mechanical complica tions (e.g., ventricular septal rupture, mitral valve
insuf ﬁciency because of papillary muscle infarction or rupture, or free wall rupture), CABG is recom-
mended at the time of surgery, with the goal of improving survival ( 8,9).
1C - L D4. In patients with STEMI and evidence of failed reperfusion after ﬁbrinolytic therapy, rescue PCI of the
infarct artery should be performed to improve clinical outcomes ( 10-13 ).
2a B-R5. In patients with STEMI who are treated with ﬁbrinolytic therapy, angiography within 3 to 24 hours with
the intent to perform PCI is reasonable to improve clinical outcomes ( 14-20 ).Lawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e38

Synopsis
Immediate reperfusion therapy for patients with
STEMI improves mortality rate, and primary PCI has beenshown to be superior to ﬁbrinolytic therapy ( 1)(Figure 3 )
(6,23,27-29 ). Fibrinolytic therapy is recommended only in
cases in which primary PCI is not immediately available
and the delay from hospital presentation to PCI is
anticipated to be >120 minutes ( 30). Because approxi-
mately 35% of patients treated with ﬁbrinolysis do not
achieve reperfusion ( 31), and an additional 10% have
ineffective reperfusion (TIMI [Thrombolysis In Myocar-dial Infarction] ﬂow grade <3) (1), early transfer of pa-
tients to centers capable of performing PCI will facilitateearly catheterization and/or PCI ( 15-17 ,19). CABG has a
l i m i t e dr o l ei nt h ea c u t ep h a s eo fS T E M I ,a n di t su s ei n
this setting continues to decrease ( 23). Older case series
have highlighted a potential excess mortality risk whenCABG is performed early after STEMI ( 32). However,
contemporary modi ﬁcations to the standard operative
approach, improved anesthesia and monitoring,improved technical methods, and adjunctive temporarymechanical circulatory support devices may lead to
improved rates of survival after CABG ( Figure 3 ).
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Multiple RCTs and meta-analyses have shown that
primary PCI reduces death, MI, stroke, and majorbleeding as compared with ﬁbrinolysis, especially
when treatment delays are minimized ( 1-5). This
bene ﬁt is seen even among patients transferred from
non-PCI hospitals if transf er times are reasonable and
total ischemic time after presentation is <120 minutes
(4,30).
2. In patients with STEMI complicated by cardiogenic
shock, an early revascularization strategy is associ-ated with a signi ﬁcant survival bene ﬁt(6). In theSHOCK (Should We Emergently Revascularize
Occluded Coronaries for C ardiogenic Shock) trial,
although the primary endpoint of 30-day survival forpatients with STEMI and cardiogenic shock was notimproved with early revascularization, compared withinitial medical stabilization ( 6), the secondary
outcome of mortality rate at 6 months was signi ﬁcantly
lower in the group of patients randomized to earlyrevascularization and treated with either PCI or CABG.
3. The mortality rate associated with emergency CABG
and surgical management of a mechanical complica-tion of STEMI remains high ( 33). However, there are
currently few medical or percutaneous treatment
methods to effectively treat ventricular rupture,
papillary muscle rupture leading to severe mitral
regurgitation, or ischemic ventricular septal defect.CABG and these associated procedures may benecessary to treat the mechanical complications ofSTEMI or cardiogenic shock in the emergency setting(34-38 ). Placement of a mechanical support device
may be useful in temporizing a patient with a me-chanical complication of STEMI, and urgent or emer-
gency surgery remains the best treatment ( 39,40). No
RCT has examined the bene ﬁt of adding CABG at the
time of emergent cardiac surgery for treatment of amechanical complication of STEMI versus emergentsurgery for the treatment of a mechanical complica-tion alone. In addition, no RCT has examined thebene ﬁt of emergent cardiac surgery for the treatment
of a mechanical complication of STEMI versus initial
medical stabilization and delayed surgery.
4. Rescue PCI performed in patients with evidence of
failed reperfusion after ﬁbrinolytic therapy has been
associated with a reduction in cardiovascular events
(10-13 ), when compared with conservative care or
repeat ﬁbrinolysis. In these studies, patients2a B-NR6. In patients with STEMI who are stable and presenting 12 to 24 hours after symptom onset, PCI is
reasonable to improve clinical outcomes ( 21,22).
2a B-NR7. In patients with STEMI in whom PCI is not feasible or successful, with a large area of myocardium at risk,
emergency or urgent CABG can be effective as a repe rfusion modality to improve clinical outcomes
(23,24).
2a C-EO8. In patients with STEMI complicated by ongoing ische mia, acute severe heart failu re, or life-threatening
arrhythmia, PCI can be bene ﬁcial to improve clinical outcomes, irre spective of time delay from MI onset.
3: No Bene ﬁt B-R9. In asymptomatic stable patients with STEMI who have a totally occluded infarct artery >24 hours after
symptom onset and are without evidence of s evere ischemia, PCI should not be performed ( 25,26).
3: Harm C-EO10. In patients with STEMI, emergency CABG shou ld not be performed after failed primary PCI:
/C15In the absence of ischemia or a large area of myocardium at risk, or
/C15If surgical revascularization i s not feasible because of a no-re ﬂow state or poor distal targets.(Continued)JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee39

randomized to rescue PCI had higher rates of bleeding
and cerebrovascular accident ( 10-12 ). All these studies
were performed in the era of femoral artery access,with limited options for antiplatelet and anticoagu-lant therapy. Previous concerns about increased
bleeding or increased stroke risk in patients under-
going rescue PCI could be mitigated by using half-dose tenecteplase in patients >75 years of age ( 31),
by substituting radial access in place of femoral access(41), or by eliminating the routine use of platelet
glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors. With these tech-niques, the reduced complications associated with PCIwould provide a more favorable balance of risk to
bene ﬁt with rescue PCI than with conservative care.
5. Studies have shown a reduction in MACE when
routine early angiography with the intent toperform PCI is performed after ﬁbrinolytic therapy(15,16,18-20 ,42). This was further supported by
several meta-analyses of these trials, which showed ar e d u c t i o ni nd e a t ho ri n f a r c tion with an early invasive
approach after ﬁbrinolytic therapy ( 14,17). In these
early-transfer studies, more than 80% of patients who
were transferred underwent PCI to treat a signi ﬁcant
residual stenosis or suboptimal ﬂow of the infarct ar-
tery. The bene ﬁt of immediate angiography was most
notable in patients undergoing angiography early af-ter symptom onset or after administration of ﬁbrino-
lytic therapy ( 14).
6. The bene ﬁt of PCI for asymptomatic patients pre-
senting 12 to 24 hours after symptom onset is not well
studied. The BRAVE-2 (Beyond 12 Hours Reperfusion
Alternative Evaluation-2) trial examined the bene ﬁts
of PCI in reducing infarct size in asymptomatic pa-tients with STEMI and symptom onset >12 hoursFIGURE 3 Indications for Revascularization in S TEMI (Patients Without Fibrinolytics)
Colors correspond to Table 2 . CABG indicates coronary artery bypass graft; PCI, percutaneous coronary intervention; and STEMI, ST-segment –elevation myocardial
infarction. This algorithm summarizes the recommendations in this guideline for revascularization of the infarct artery in STEMI. It is not meant to encompass every
patient scenario or situation, and clinicians are encouraged to use a Heart Team approach when care decisions are unclear and to see the accompanying s upportive text
for each recommendation. Additionally, in situations that lack suf ﬁcient data to make formal recommendations for care, please see Section 17 ,“Unanswered Questions
and Future Directions. ”Lawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e40

but<48 hours before presentation ( 21). In this small
study, an invasive strategy of coronary stenting wasassociated with a reduction in left ventricular infarctsize (primary endpoint) com p a r e dw i t hac o n s e r v a t i v e
strategy ( 21). Moreover, an invasive strategy was
associated with a reduction in adjusted 4-year mor-
tality rate compared with the conservative strategy(43). Observational data from the Prospective National
Observational study also su pported a lower adjusted
1-year mortality rate in patients with STEMI andsymptom onset 12 to 24 hours before presentation(22). This information should be balanced by the po-
tential for “harm ”when PCI of a totally occluded ar-
tery is performed more than 24 hours after symptom
onset. Therefore, delayed PCI of an infarct arterybeyond 24 hours should be considered only in pa-tients with a patent artery.
7. In patients with STEMI, there may be situations in
which PCI is not possible for anatomic reasons orbecause of the presence of severe left main ormultivessel CAD. Additionally, in unusual circum-
stances, PCI may not be successful. In such cases,
CABG can be an effective primary reperfusionstrategy, particularly if there is a large area ofmyocardium at risk ( 23,24).
8. There are no RCTs examining the bene ﬁto fP C Ii n
patients with STEMI presenting >12 hours after
symptom onset who have clinical evidence ofongoing ischemia, acute severe heart failure, or life-
threatening arrhythmias. Intuitively, a strategy of
delayed reperfusion in these unstable patient sub-sets would be expected to improve symptoms andoutcomes, and for this reason PCI should be
considered.
9. In OAT (Occluded Artery Trial), PCI of a totally
occluded vessel did not reduce cardiovascular eventsat 4 years of follow-up ( 25), and there was a trend
toward a higher rate of recurrent infarction in the
group of patients randomized to PCI. Patients whohad severe ischemia on noninvasive stress testingwere not enrolled in this trial. Similar ﬁndings were
noted in the DECOPI (Desobstruction Coronaire enPost-Infarctus) trial, which enrolled patients with anoccluded artery presenting 2 to 15 days after symptomonset ( 26).
10. Emergency CABG to restore ﬂow to the infarct artery
after failed PCI should be considered only in patientswith ongoing ischemia and a large area of myocar-dium at risk. In some cases, after primary PCI, thevessel remains occluded or with slow ﬂow caused by
distal embolization (no re ﬂow). The no-re ﬂow phe-
nomenon refers to unsuccessful microvascular reper-fusion even in the presence of a widely patent
epicardial coronary artery. This usually occurs with
reperfusion in the setting o f PCI for the treatment of
STEMI, after prolonged myocardial ischemia, or with alarge thrombus burden. Because CABG is unlikely toimprove perfusion to the subtended myocardium inthe setting of no-re ﬂow, emergency CABG may be
harmful in this setting and may subject the patient tounnecessary risk.
5.2. Revascularization of the Non-Infarct Artery in Patients
With STEMI
Recommendations for Revascularization of t he Non-Infarct Artery in Patients With STEMI
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplement 8 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1A1. In selected hemodynamically stable patients with S TEMI and multivessel disease, after successful primary
PCI, staged PCI of a signi ﬁcant non-infarct artery stenosis is recommended to reduce the risk of death or
MI (1-4).
2a C-EO2. In selected patients with STEMI with complex mult ivessel non-infarct artery disease, after successful
primary PCI, elective CABG is reasonable to reduce the risk of cardiac events.
2b B-R3. In selected hemodynamically stable patients with S TEMI and low-complexity multivessel disease, PCI of a
non-infarct artery stenosis may be considered at the time of primary PCI to reduce cardiac event rates(1,2,5-7).
3: Harm B-R4. In patients with STEMI complicated by cardiogenic s hock, routine PCI of a non-infarct artery at the time
of primary PCI should not be performed because o f the higher risk of death or renal failure ( 8-10 ).JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee41

Synopsis
A Heart Team approach is utilized to determine optimal
revascularization strategy in patients with STEMI andmultivessel CAD. Revascularization strategies ( Figure 4 )
f o rp a t i e n t sw i t hS T E M Ia n dm ultivessel disease include
multivessel PCI at the time of primary PCI, PCI of the
i n f a r c ta r t e r yo n l yf o l l o w e db ys t a g e dP C Io fan o n - i n f a r c tartery, PCI of the infarct artery only with an ischemia-guided approach to treatment of a non-infarct artery, orPCI of the infarct artery only with elective CABG. Obser-vational studies and meta-analyses have reported con-ﬂicting results for the superiority of one approach over
another ( 11). Recent randomized trials of PCI in STEMI
support the safety and ef ﬁcacy of multivessel PCI in
selected patients with STEMI ( 2-4,6,7). The data are
strongest for patients undergoing staged PCI ( 4). It should
be noted that only one-third of enrolled patients in thesetrials had triple-vessel disease, and most of these trialsexcluded patients with left main disease, chronic total
occlusion (CTO) of the non-inf arct artery, or complex non-
infarct artery disease. For this reason, CABG remains a
reasonable option in patien ts with residual complex non-
infarct artery disease. Ideal patients who may bene ﬁt
from revascularization of non-infarct arteries includethose with a large area of myocardium at risk and thosewithout signi ﬁcant comorbidities that would increase the
risk of revascularization.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. RCTs have demonstrated a reduction in MACE with
staged PCI (either in hospital or after discharge)compared with culprit vessel –only PCI ( 1-4). This
bene ﬁt is driven largely by a reduction in the risk of
repeat revascularization or re-infarction. Mostrecently, the COMPLETE (Complete versus Culprit-Only Revascularization Strategies to Treat MultivesselDisease after Early PCI for STEMI) trial enrolled 4041
patients and demonstrated a 3-year reduction in the
combined endpoint of death or MI with staged PCI ofthe non-infarct artery (performed within 45 days ofS T E M I ) ,c o m p a r e dw i t hc o n s e r v a t i v ec a r e( 4). These
bene ﬁts were consistent, irrespective of the timing of
the non-infarct artery PCI ( 12). Most of these trials
included patients with low-complexity disease. Notrial has shown a difference in the outcome of mor-
tality rate alone between the strategies. In the COM-
PLETE trial, <1% of enrolled patients had non-infarct
artery disease involving the left main artery, and thebaseline SYNTAX score of the enrolled patients waslow. Additionally, these trials enrolled patients withlesions that had a >70% diameter stenosis. For inter-
mediate lesions, physiological testing with iFR or FFRmay be useful to guide PCI ( 4).2. In patients with STEMI and complex multivessel CAD,
elective CABG remains an appropriate revasculariza-tion option after successful PCI of an infarct artery inpatients who meet criteria for CABG ( Table 7 ). Although
the COMPLETE trial demonstrated that staged PCI of
the non-infarct artery is associated with a reduction in
the risk of death or recurrent infarction in follow-up,patients intended for a planned surgical revasculari-zation procedure were not included in this study. Inpatients with complex non-infarct artery disease, thedecision to proceed with PCI versus CABG of the non-infarct artery should include a Heart Team discussion.
3. Randomized trials have shown a reduction in MACE
with a multivessel PCI strat egy performed at the time
of primary PCI as compared with culprit artery –only
PCI ( 1,2,5-7). The bene ﬁts reported in these trials
were driven largely by a re duction in repeat revas-
cularization with multivessel PCI. PCI of a non-infarct artery stenosis may be considered at thetime of successful primary PCI, but patients shouldbe carefully selected. Patients who are most appro-
p r i a t ef o rc o m p l e t er e v a s c u l a r i z a t i o na tt h et i m eo f
primary PCI include those with uncomplicated PCI of
the infarct artery and with low-complexity non-infarct artery disease who have normal left ventric-ular ﬁlling pressures and normal renal function. Cli-
nicians should integrate clinical data, lesion severityand complexity, patient stability, risk of volumeoverload, and risk of cont rast nephropathy before
e m b a r k i n go na ni m m e d i a t e multivessel primary PCI
strategy.
4. Culprit vessel –only primary PCI is recommended as
the primary PCI strategy in most patients withSTEMI complicated by cardiogenic shock who havemultivessel disease. This is based on consistentﬁndings from observational data and 1 randomized
trial that showed no advantage for immediate
multivessel PCI ( 8-10 ). In the CULPRIT-SHOCK
(Culprit Lesion Only PCI Versus Multivessel PCIin Cardiogenic Shock) trial of patients with acuteMI (AMI) complicated by cardiogenic shock, mul-tivessel PCI at the time of primary PCI resulted ina higher risk of the primary endpoint of death orneed for renal replacement therapy ( 8,9). Of note,
in this trial, investigators were permitted to pro-
ceed with PCI of all non-infarct vessels with >70%
diameter stenosis that were $2m mi nd i a m e t e r ,
including those that were chronically occluded.The risks associated with immediate multivesselPCI include volume overload, contrast nephropa-thy, and ischemic complications in the non-infarctartery that could cause further hemodynamicdeterioration.Lawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e42

FIGURE 4 Revascularization of Noninfarct-Related Cor onary Artery Lesions in Patients With STEMI
Colors correspond to Table 2 . CABG indicates coronary artery bypass graft; GDMT, guideline-directed medical therapy; PCI, percutaneous coronary inter-
vention; and STEMI, ST-segment –elevation myocardial infarction. *Normal blood pressure and heart rate left ventricular end-diastolic pressure <20 mm Hg,
no chronic renal insuf ﬁciency or acute kidney injury, and expected total contrast volume <3/C2glomerular ﬁltration rate, simple lesion anatomy. †In making
the decision about the need for and mode of revascularization the Heart Team should consider the suitability of the non-culprit artery for PCI, the cor onary
complexity and the risk of revascularization, the extent of myocardium at risk, and patient comorbidities, including life expectancy or other signi ﬁcant
patient comorbidities, such as chronic renal insuf ﬁciency or acute kidney injury. ‡Staged PCI can be performed in hospital or after discharge, up to 45 days
post MI.
 Symbol denotes time elapsed before proceeding to the next procedure. This algorithm summarizes the recommendations in this guideline for
the care of patients with STEMI and noninfarct artery disease. It is not meant to encompass every patient scenario or situation, and clinicians are enc ouraged to
use a Heart Team approach when care decisions are unclear and to see the accompanying supportive text for each recommendation. Additionally, in situa tions
that lack suf ﬁcient data to make formal recommendations for care, please see Section 17 ,“Unanswered Questions and Future Directions. ”JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee43

6. REVASCULARIZATION IN NSTE-ACS
6.1. Coronary Angiography and Revascularization in Patients
With NSTE-ACSTABLE 7 Patient Clinical Status De ﬁnitions to Guide Revascularization ( 13-15 )
Elective The patient ’s cardiac function has been stable in the days or weeks before intervention (whether surgical or procedural). The intervention could be
deferred without increased risk of compromise to cardiac outcome.
Urgent Intervention is required during the same hospitalization to minimize chance of further clinical deterioration. Examples include, but are no t limited to,
worsening sudden chest pain, heart failure, acute myocardial infarction, anatomy, intra-aortic balloon pump, unstable angina, with intravenous
nitroglycerin, or rest angina.
Emergency Patients requiring emergency intervention will have ongoing, refractory (dif ﬁcult, complicated, and/or unmanageable), unrelenting cardiac
compromise, with or without hemodynamic instability, and not responsive to any form of therapy except cardiac intervention. An emergency
intervention is one in which there should be no delay in providing operative intervention.
Emergency/
salvagePatients requiring emergency/salvage intervention are those who require cardiopulmonary resuscitation en route to the operating room, or procedu re
room, before induction of anesthesia or who require extracorporeal membrane oxygenation to maintain life.
Recommendations for Coronary Angiography and R evascularization in Patients With NSTE-ACS
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplement 9 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1A1. In patients with NSTE-ACS who are at elevated risk of recurrent ischemic events and are appropriate
candidates for revascularization, an invasive strateg y with the intent to proceed with revascularization is
indicated to reduce cardiovascular events ( 1-4).
1 B-R2. In patients with NSTE-ACS and cardiogenic shock who are appropriate candidates for revascularization,
emergency revascularization is recommended to reduce risk of death ( 5-9).
1 C-LD3. In appropriate patients with NSTE-ACS who have re fractory angina or hemodynamic or electrical insta-
bility, an immediate invasive strategy with intent to perform revascularization is indicated to improveoutcomes ( 10).
2a B-R4. In patients with NSTE-ACS who are initially stabi lized and are at high risk of clinical events, it is
reasonable to choose an early invasive strategy (wit hin 24 hours) over a delayed invasive strategy to
improve outcomes ( 11-16 ).
2a B-R5. In patients with NSTE-ACS who are initially stabi lized and are at intermediate or low risk of clinical
events, an invasive strategy with intent to perform revascularization is reasonable before hospital
discharge to improve outcomes ( 11-16 ).
2a B-NR6. In patients with NSTE-ACS who have failed PCI and h ave ongoing ischemia, hemodynamic compromise, or
t h r e a t e n e do c c l u s i o no fa na r t e r yw i t hs u b s t a n t i a lm y ocardium at risk, who are appropriate candidates for
CABG, emergency CABG is reasonable ( 5-7,17).
3: Harm B-R7. In patients with NSTE-ACS who present in cardioge nic shock, routine multivessel PCI of non-culprit
lesions in the same setting should not be performed ( 18,19).Lawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e44

Synopsis
A routine invasive approach for patients with NSTE-
ACS is associated with improved outcomes ( 1-4,20,21).
Risk strati ﬁcation with a validated score (i.e., GRACE or
TIMI) has been recommended to guide the timing of cor-
onary angiography ( 22,23) .T h eG R A C Es c o r eh a sb e e n
used in most clinical trials to identify patients who wereat high risk of death or MI. It enables a direct estimation ofthe mortality risk during hospitalization and at longerterm followup ( 24). Other factors associated with higher
risk include older age ( $75 years), elevated TIMI risk score
(https://timi.org/calculators/ti mi-risk-score-calculator-for-
ua-nstemi/ )(25) ,a n de l e v a t e dc a r d i a cm a r k e r s( 11,26).
Factors indicating a need for a n urgent revascularization
(Table 7 ) with either PCI or CABG include threatening
anatomy, ongoing ischemia, or hemodynamic compro-mise. In such patients and in those with complex CAD,treatment should be individualized and involve a HeartTeam discussion.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. In patients with NSTE-ACS, an initial invasive
approach is associated with a lower rate of the com-bined endpoint of death, MI, or refractory angina at 4
to 6 months ’follow-up ( 1-4)(Figure 5 ). Pooled trial data
have demonstrated lower rates of recurrent infarctionand recurrent ischemia with an invasive strategy ( 4).
The bene ﬁts of an invasive approach are most pro-
nounced among patients with elevated biomarkers orother higher-risk ﬁndings ( 1) .T h ei n v a s i v ea p p r o a c h
also provides important prognostic information, suchas extent and severity of CAD, hemodynamics, and left
ventricular function, allowing for precise determina-
tion of risk, antithrombotic treatment guidance, andsuitability for revascularization with PCI or CABG.Roughly 20% to 25% of patients enrolled in the earlytrials examining the bene ﬁts of a routine invasive
approach underwent CABG. In patients with multi-vessel disease, the mode of revascularization shouldbe based on the acuity of the patient ’s condition,
the angiographic characteristics of the culprit lesion,
and the complexity of the patient ’sa n a t o m ya n d ,
when appropriate, shou ld include a Heart Team
discussion.
2. In the SHOCK trial, patients were randomized to
medical therapy or emergency revascularization.Among the patients randomized to revascularization,two-thirds of patients were referred for PCI and one-
third for CABG, and the decision to proceed with PCI
or CABG was made by the treating physician ( 9). Me-
dian time from randomization to revascularization was0.9 hours for PCI and 2.7 hours for CABG. The SHOCKtrial supported a strategy of emergency angiographywith immediate revascularization in patients with AMI
complicated by cardiogenic shock. At 6 months, themortality rate was signi ﬁcantly lower in patients ran-
domized to revascularizati on than in those randomized
to medical therapy ( 9). In the SHOCK trial, there was no
difference in mortality rate with PCI or CABG for those
patients randomized to earl y revascularization, with a
similar survival regardless of the mode of revasculari-zation at 30 days and 1 year. Additionally, observa-tional studies ( 5-7,
17) of patients with cardiogenic
shock referred for CABG have reported acceptableoutcomes with emergency revascularization. Patientswith shock may bene ﬁt from mechanical circulatory
support devices before revascularization, especially if
CABG is planned ( 27).
3. Patients with NSTE-ACS who are clinically unstable
because of refractory angina, intractable arrhythmias,or hemodynamic instability have been consistentlyexcluded from clinical tria ls evaluating the optimal
timing of coronary angiography ( 11,28). Although evi-
dence from clinical trial data is lacking, intuitively,
immediate angiography (within 2 hours) with plans for
appropriate revascularization would be expected toimprove outcomes if revascul arization stabilizes the
clinical condition.
4. An early invasive strategy performed within 24 hours
in high-risk (GRACE score >140) patients is associated
with a lower incidence of recurrent ischemia or needfor urgent revascularization and a shorter hospital stay(11,12,14-16 ). Although clinical trials have not demon-
strated a clear advantage with an early invasive strat-egy (within 24 hours) as opposed to a delayed invasive
strategy in the overall population of patients with
NSTE-ACS ( 12,16), prespeci ﬁed subgroup analyses of
these trials support the use of an early invasive strat-e g yf o rh i g h - r i s kp a t i e n t s( 11,12,16). The TIMACS
(Timing of Intervention in Acute Coronary Syndromes)trial, in which patients were enrolled within 24 hoursof symptoms and randomized to angiography at #24
hours versus $36 hours from time of randomization,
and the VERDICT (Very Early vs Deferred Invasive
Evaluation Using Computerized Tomography) trial, inwhich patients were randomized to angiography at <12
hours versus 48 to 72 hours from time of diagnosis,both evaluated the value of early invasive manage-ment of symptoms for patients with NSTE-ACS anddemonstrated a lower rate of cardiovascular events infollow-up in the high-risk subgroup of patients ran-
domized to early angiography.
5. In intermediate- or low-risk patients, timing is not
critical, and a delayed invasive strategy within 48 to 72hours has been demonstrated to be acceptable(11-16 ,28). Randomized trial data have notJACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee45

demonstrated differences in rates of death and MI be-
tween an early invasive strategy (coronaryangiography <24 hours after admission) and a delayed
invasive approach (48 –72 hours) in a nonselected
population of patients with NSTEMI ( 11-16 ,29,30).
However, low-risk patients bene ﬁt from a routine
invasive strategy before hospital discharge, with asigni ﬁcant reduction in the risk of cardiovascular death
or MI, compared with a selective invasive strategy ( 21).
6. Although there are no randomized trials speci ﬁcally
evaluating emergency CABG versus medical therapy ordelayed revascularization in patients with NSTE-ACSand failed PCI who have ongoing ischemia or hemo-
dynamic compromise, multiple retrospective reviews
have noted a reduced mortality rate in patients with anemergency approach ( 6,9,17) .T h ea p p r o p r i a t es a f e
timing of CABG is carefully determined with a HeartTeam approach in patients with NSTE-ACS who are on
dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT).
7. In the CULPRIT-SHOCK trial, almost 40% of enrolled
patients had an NSTEMI. As mentioned in section 5.2 ,
patients were included in the trial if they had 2 or more
vessels with >70% diameter stenosis that were $2
mm in diameter. Those with chronic total occlusionswere eligible for inclusion in the study. Patients in theCULPRIT-SHOCK trial who were randomized to culprit-only PCI with the option of staged revascularization ofnon-culprit lesions had a lower rate of thecomposite endpoint of death and dialysis at 30 days and1 year. Culprit-vessel PCI was associated with a signi ﬁ-
cant all-cause mortality rate reduction at 30 days but not
at 1 year ( 18,19). As was noted in patients with STEMI,
the results of the CULPRIT-SHOCK trial showed nobene ﬁt to immediate multivessel PCI in NSTEMI.
FIGURE 5 Recommendations for the Timing of Invasive Strategy in Patients With NSTE-ACS
Colors correspond to Table 2 . GRACE indicates Global Registry of Acute Coronary Events; and NSTE-ACS, non –ST-segment –elevation acute coronary syndrome.
*https://www.mdcalc.com/grace-acs-risk-mortality-calculator (31). This algorithm summarizes the recommendations in this guideline for coronary artery angiography
with the intent to perform revascularization in NSTE-ACS. It is not meant to encompass every patient scenario or situation, and clinicians are encour aged to use a Heart
Team approach when care decisions are unclear and to see the accompanying supportive text for each recommendation. Additionally, in situations that lack suf ﬁcient
data to make formal recommendations for care, please see Section 17 ,“Unanswered Questions and Future Directions. ”Lawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e46

7. REVASCULARIZATION IN SIHD
7.1. Revascularization to Improve Survival in SIHD Compared
With Medical Therapy
Synopsis
Studies have shown that CABG confers a survival
bene ﬁt over medical therapy in multiple subsets of pa-
tients, including those with left main CAD ( Figure 6 )
(9-12), triple-vessel CAD ( 13), and ischemic cardiomyopa-
thy ( 1,3-7,31-33 ). Many of these studies were conducted
before the widespread use of antiplatelet and statin
therapies and before the b road recognition of bene ﬁtf r o m
beta-blockers and ACE inhibitors/ARBs. There are noRCTs that have demonstrated a survival advantage of PCI
over medical therapy in patients with SIHD ( 14,17,34-38 ).
There may be an advantage of PCI over medical therapy in
patients who have a clinical indication for CABG but are
deemed prohibitive surgical risk. For this reason, theHeart Team must weigh the risks and bene ﬁts of PCI as
c o m p a r e dt om e d i c a lt h e r a p yi ns u c hp a t i e n t s .T h eISCHEMIA (International Study of Comparative HealthEffectiveness with Medical and Invasive Approaches) trialRecommendations for Revascularization to Improve Survival in SIHD Compared With Medical Therapy
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplement 10 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
Left ventricular dysfunction and multivessel CAD
1 B-R1. In patients with SIHD and multivessel CAD appropriate for CABG with severe left ventricular systolic
dysfunction (left ventricular ejection fraction <35%), CABG is recommended to improve survival ( 1,2).
2a B-NR2. In selected patients with SIHD and multivessel CAD appropriate for CABG and mild-to-moderate left
ventricular systolic dysfunc tion (ejection fraction 35% –50%), CABG (to include a left internal mammary
artery [LIMA] graft to the LAD) is reasonable to improve survival ( 3-8).
Left main CAD
1 B-R3. In patients with SIHD and signi ﬁcant left main stenosis, CABG is recommended to improve survival ( 9-12 ).
2a B-NR4. In selected patients with SIHD and signi ﬁcant left main stenosis for whom PCI can provide equivalent
r e v a s c u l a r i z a t i o nt ot h a tp o s s i b l ew i t hC A B G ,P C Ii sr e a s o n a b l et oi m p r o v es u r v i v a l( 9).
Multivessel CAD
2b B-R5. In patients with SIHD, normal ejection fraction, signi ﬁcant stenosis in 3 major coronary arteries (with or
without proximal LAD), and anatomy suitable for C ABG, CABG may be reasonable to improve survival
(10,13-15 ).
2b B-R6. In patients with SIHD, normal ejection fraction, signi ﬁcant stenosis in 3 major coronary arteries (with or without
proximal LAD), and anatomy suitable for PCI, the usefulness of PCI to improve survival is uncertain ( 14-24 ).
Stenosis in the proximal LAD artery
2b B-R7. In patients with SIHD, normal left ventricular ejection fraction, and signi ﬁcant stenosis in the proximal
LAD, the usefulness of coronary revascular ization to improve survival is uncertain ( 10,14,17,24-27 ).
Single- or double-vessel disease not involving the proximal LAD
3: No Bene ﬁt B-R8. In patients with SIHD, normal left ventricular ejec tion fraction, and 1- or 2-vessel CAD not involving the
proximal LAD, coronary revascularizatio n is not recommended to improve survival ( 10,14,16,26,28,29).
3: Harm B-NR9. In patients with SIHD who have ‡1 coronary arteries that are not anatomically or functionally signi ﬁcant
(<70% diameter of non –left main coronary artery stenosis, FFR >0.80), coronary revascularization
should not be performed with the primary or sole intent to improve survival ( 26,30).JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee47

randomized patients with SIHD and moderate-to-severe
ischemia on stress testing to an initial invasive strategyversus an initial conservative strategy. Patients with leftmain disease or an ejection fraction <35% were excluded
from enrollment. As compared with a strategy of medical
therapy alone, an invasive strategy including revascular-
ization with PCI or CABG was not associated withimproved outcomes ( 14).
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supporting Text
1. The strongest evidence in the past decade to support
revascularization with CABG in patients with left ven-tricular dysfunction and CAD appropriate for CABG hasbeen the STICH (Surgical Tre atment for Ischemic Heart
Failure) trial ( 1,39,40) ,w h i c hr a n d o m i z e dp a t i e n t sw i t h
left ventricular dysfunc tion (ejection fraction #35%) to
either CABG with medical therapy or medical therapy
alone. This study initially did not demonstrate a sur-vival bene ﬁt for CABG over a median follow-up of 5
years ( 39), but a subsequent report from this trial
evaluating long-term follow-up at 10 years reported asurvival bene ﬁt of CABG compared with medical ther-
apy alone ( 1,40). The use of myocardial viability
studies in this study population demonstrated no
relevance to study outcomes; however, this testing was
not standardized ( 41). There are insuf ﬁcient data to
make recommendations for using PCI in this patientpopulation.
2. Evidence for a survival advantage with CABG in pa-
tients with SIHD and moderate left ventriculardysfunction comes from subgroup analyses of patientsenrolled in the Coronary Artery Surgery Study ( 3)a n d
the Veterans Administration Coronary Artery Bypass
Cooperative Study with LV dysfunction ( 42), as well as
a meta-analysis ( 10) of the RCTs of CABG versus med-
ical therapy. In these studies, patients with left ven-tricular dysfunction had a signi ﬁcant survival bene ﬁt
with CABG, particularly patients with accompanyingtriple-vessel disease. Several registry studies havesupported these ﬁndings ( 4-7,31-33 ). The use of PCI in
this patient population requires more study.
3. The Veterans Administration Coronary Artery Bypass
Surgery Cooperative Study r andomized patients with
SIHD to a strategy of CABG versus medical therapy ( 43).
In this study, close to 15% of enrolled patients hadsigni ﬁcant left main disease ( 43). At 42 months ’follow-
up, CABG was associated with a signi ﬁcant survival
bene ﬁt in the subgroup of patients with left main dis-
ease ( 11). Additionally, a meta-analysis of the RCTs
comparing CABG with medical therapy supportedthese ﬁndings, with a 70% reduction in 5-year mortal-
ity rate with CABG versus medical therapy for thegroup of patients with left main disease ( 10). Subse-
quent studies have supported these ﬁndings ( 9,44-46 ).Although the evidence to support revascularization
with CABG is derived mainly from older RCTs, there areno new data to refute this evidence, as all of thecontemporary clinical tria ls comparing revasculariza-
tion with medical therapy ha ve excluded patients with
signi ﬁcant stenoses of the left main artery ( 14,24).
4. The evidence for a survival advantage for PCI over
medical therapy in patients with left main CAD isinferential but plausible. Several registry studies havesuggested a survival bene ﬁt of PCI over medical ther-
apy in patients with left main CAD ( 47,48)., A network
meta-analysis of 19 studies found that the survivaladvantage for PCI over medical therapy in patients
with left main CAD was identical to the survival
advantage for CABG over medical therapy ( 9). Addi-
tionally, RCTs and meta-analyses of these trials eval-uating outcomes of PCI versus CABG in patients withlow-to-medium anatomic c omplexity of CAD and with
left main disease that is equally suitable for surgical orpercutaneous revascularization have reported similarsurvival with PCI and CABG ( 49-55 ).
5. The new Class 2b recommendation, which represents a
downgrade from a Class 1 recommendation in the 2011CABG guideline ( 56), reﬂects new evidence showing no
advantage of CABG over medical therapy alone toimprove survival in patients with 3-vessel CAD withpreserved LV function and no LM disease. The olderr e c o m m e n d a t i o nw a sb a s e do ne v i d e n c ef r o mr e g i s t r ystudies ( 26,29,48,57), a meta-analysis ( 10), and a single
RCT ( 13), all of which were completed >20 to 40 years
ago before the development of newer surgical tech-niques or advances in medical therapy associated withimproved prognosis ( 58,59). Newer evidence from the
ISCHEMIA trial ( 14)a n df r o mm e t a - a n a l y s e s ,w h i c h
incorporated ( 15,60-62 ) or did not incorporate ( 37)t h e
ISCHEMIA results, as well as a more detailed review ofearlier studies ( 63) supported this downgrade. After
several hours of deliberation, the writing committee
concluded that using CABG as a revascularizationstrategy versus medi cal therapy alone “may be
reasonable ”to improve survival in stable patients with
3-vessel CAD. The writing committee recognized thatan adequately powered trial to test this hypothesis isunfeasible in the current era but proposed that revas-cularization confers other bene ﬁts to patients with
multivessel CAD and SIHD. Accordingly, Section 7.3 .
highlights the advantages of revascularization overmedical therapy for the prevention of cardiovascularevents.
6. The writing committee reviewed newer evidence and
concluded that the ability of PCI to improve survival,compared with medical therapy alone in patients withmultivessel CAD, remains uncertain. The recommen-
dation, which re ﬂects a weaker endorsement for PCILawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e48

than for CABG in patients with multivessel CAD, is
supported by evidence from an older registry study(48) and a subgroup analysis of patients receiving
everolimus-eluting stents in a network meta-analysis(37) that did not incorporate the results of the
ISCHEMIA trial ( 14). The preponderance of newer evi-
dence against a survival advantage of PCI comes fromthe ISCHEMIA trial itself ( 14), which is consistent withthe results of multiple earlier RCTs ( 17-23 ) and multiple
contemporary meta-analyses ( 15,60-62 )i n c o r p o r a t i n g
the ISCHEMIA trial results ( 14), all of which have not
shown a survival advantage for PCI over medicaltherapy for patients with multivessel CAD.
7. An earlier meta-analysis ( 10) and several earlier regis-
try studies ( 26,29) suggested a survival advantage of
CABG over medical therapy in patients with disease inFIGURE 6 Revascularization in Patients With SIHD
Colors correspond to Table 2 . CABG indicates coronary artery bypass graft; CAD, coronary artery disease; EF, ejection fraction; GDMT, guideline-directed medical
therapy; PCI, percutaneous coronary intervention; and SIHD, stable ischemic heart disease. This algorithm summarizes the recommendations in this guideline for the
care of patients with stable CAD. It is not meant to encompass every patient scenario or situation, and clinicians are encouraged to use a Heart Team app roach when care
decisions are unclear and to see the accompanying supportive text for each recommendation. Additionally, in situations that lack suf ﬁcient data to make formal
recommendations for care, please see Section 17 ,“Unanswered Questions and Future Directions. ”JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee49

the proximal LAD. Additionally, a network meta-
analysis found a survival advantage for PCI ( 37).
However, a dedicated RCT found no survival advan-tage for either CABG or PCI over medical therapy in thissetting ( 64,65), and the ISCHEMIA trial ( 14)s h o w e dn o
difference in event rates with either CABG or PCI over
medical therapy when patients had multivessel CADinvolving the proximal LAD. In the ISCHEMIA trial,close to half of enrolled patients had >50% stenosis of
the proximal LAD; in this study, there was no hetero-geneity of treatment effect on outcomes with thepresence of LAD disease.
8. A clinical principle from several studies is that the
more myocardium is at risk, the greater is the survival
advantage of revascularization over medical therapy,and in patients with little myocardium at risk (1- or 2-
vessel CAD without LAD involvement), there is likelyno survival bene ﬁt of revascularization in patients with
SIHD ( 10,17,26,29,37).
9. In patients without clinical or physiological evidence
of signi ﬁcant disease, bypass surgery of nonobstructive
disease has been reported to stimulate progression of
CAD ( 66), and PCI may precipitate periprocedural MIs
(23) and is not associated with improved outcomes
(30,67-69 ).
7.2. Revascularization to Reduce Cardiovascular Events in SIHD
Compared With Medical Therapy
Recommendation for Revascularization to Reduce Cardiovascular Events in SIHD Compared With Medical Therapy
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized in Online Data Supplement 11 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
2a B-R1. In patients with SIHD and multivessel CAD appropri ate for either CABG or PCI, revascularization is
reasonable to lower the risk of cardiovascular ev ents such as spontaneous MI, unplanned urgent re-
vascularizations, or cardiac death ( 1-8).
Synopsis
Clinical practice guidelines have traditionally included
recommendations for revascul arization in patients with
SIHD based on the ability of CABG or PCI to improveoverall survival ( Section 7.1 .) or to reduce ischemic
symptoms ( Section 7.3 .), as compared with medical ther-
apy alone. However, there are other clinical events that
can affect a patient ’s overall prognosis, and that remain
important considerations for patients. Several studiessuggest that revascularization with CABG or PCI lowers therisk of adverse events such as cardiac death, MI, or urgentrevascularization compared with medical therapy alone(2,5,6,9,10).
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supporting Text
1. In MASS (Medicine, Angioplasty or Surgery Study) II,
the 10-year rates of cardiac death were lower after CABG
or PCI than after medical therapy alone ( 2). Lower rates
of cardiac death were seen af ter revascularization than
with medical therapy alone in a meta-analysis of 25studies enrolling 19,806 patients ( 3). However, a sta-
tistically nonsigni ﬁcant reduction was seen in a con-
current meta-analysis of 12,103 patients enrolled in 7RCTs ( 8). Several other studies found no difference incardiac death after revascularization than with medical
therapy alone ( 10,11).
Cardiac death may be related to the occurrence of MI after
revascularization ( 12). The relative prognostic importance
of procedural MIs versus that of late spontaneous MIs re-mains uncertain ( 13). In the ISCHEMIA trial ( 1), the inci-
dence of procedural type 4a or type 5 MIs was increasedwith revascularization, but the incidence of late MI(spontaneous MI [type 1], demand-induced MI [type 2], orMIs associated with stent thrombosis [type 4b] or with
restenosis [type 4c]) was reduced. A preplanned analysis
of the MI patterns in the ISCHEMIA trial ( 4) found that all-
cause death was increased with spontaneous MIs but notwith procedural MIs. A large network meta-analysis foundthat spontaneous MI was reduced by revascularizationcompared with medical therapy alone ( 3). However, a
concurrent analysis found an increased rate of proceduralMI, a reduced rate of nonprocedural MI, and no difference
in overall MI ( 11). On the contrary, another meta-analysis
of stable patients, did not show a reduction in MI withrevascularization ( 10), and 1 other study reported reduction
in MI with CABG but not with PCI ( 9). Revascularization
with CABG or PCI may reduce the need for subsequenturgent revascularization or hospitalization for acute coro-nary events ( 5-8).Lawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e50

7.3. Revascularization to Improve Symptoms
Recommendations for Revascularization to Improve Symptoms
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplement 12 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1A1. In patients with refractory angina despite medical therapy and with signi ﬁcant coronary artery stenoses
amenable to revascularization, revascular ization is recommended to improve symptoms ( 1-6).
3: Harm C-LD2. In patients with angina but no anatomic or physiologic al criteria for revascularization, neither CABG nor
PCI should be performed ( 7,8).
Synopsis
One of the main goals of coronary revascularization
with either PCI or CABG surgery is to improve symptoms
(Figure 6 ). In the treatment of patients with SIHD, medical
therapy can often be an effective option. However, studieshave shown that revascularization results in a greaterimprovement in angina or quali ty of life than does medical
therapy alone ( 1-6). Additionally, some patients may be
intolerant of or unwilling to take anti-anginal medica-tions. For these reasons, reva scularization is frequently
used to provide symptom relief.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Multiple RCTs have con ﬁrmed that revascularization
improves anginal symptoms to a greater degree thanoptimal medical therapy ( 1-4,6,9,10). The results of the
small ORBITA (Objective Randomised Blinded Investi-
gation With Optimal Medical Therapy of Angioplasty in
Stable Angina) trial ( 11), which randomized patients to
PCI or a “sham ”procedure, did not support an
improvement in symptoms with PCI and raised ques-tions about the placebo effect of PCI. However, thelarger ISCHEMIA trial reported a clinically relevantimprovement in symptoms at 3 years after PCI or CABG
(1), long after a placebo effect should have dissipated.
This difference was most pronounced among the pa-
tients with more frequent angina at baseline. In theFREEDOM (Future Revascularization Evaluation in Pa-tients with Diabetes Mellit us: Optimal Management of
Multivessel Disease) trial ( 4), both revascularization
options were associated with signi ﬁcant improvement
in angina and quality of life as compared with baseline.A greater improvement in health status was noted with
CABG compared with PCI at intermediate-term follow-
up, but this difference was no longer signi ﬁcant in
longer-term follow-up.
2. Inappropriate revascularization of nonobstructive pla-
ques with CABG can lead to progression of underlyingCAD ( 7), and inappropriate use of PCI can cause peri-
procedural MIs ( 8) and would not be expected to
improve quality of life or anginal symptoms.
8. SITUATIONS IN WHICH PCI OR CABG WOULD BE
PREFERRED
8.1. Patients With Complex Disease
Recommendations for Patients With Complex Disease
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplement 13 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-R1. In patients who require revascularization for signi ﬁcant left main CAD with high-complexity CAD, it is
recommended to choose CABG ove r PCI to improve survival ( 1,2).
2a B-R2. In patients who require revascularization for mult ivessel CAD with complex or diffuse CAD (e.g., SYNTAX
score >33), it is reasonable to choose CABG over P CI to confer a survival advantage ( 2-5).
Synopsis
Revascularization with either CABG or PCI is indicated
to treat symptoms or improve outcomes in speci ﬁcs u b s e t s
of patients. However, CABG and PCI are inherentlydifferent in the mechanisms by which they improve bloodﬂow to the jeopardized myocardium. PCI will directly
relieve a discrete obstruction and increase the arteriallumen in the stented area but will have no effect on pre-venting plaque progression or rupture in other diseasedsegments within the artery. In contrast, bypass of aJACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee51

coronary artery will improve blood ﬂow to the jeopar-
dized myocardium supplied by the diseased artery andwill also protect the distal myocardial beds from futureischemic insult caused by proximal plaque progression orrupture. Although most stud ies comparing CABG and PCI
have reported similar survival ( 1,3,5-17), certain sub-
groups of patients have been shown to derive a survivalbene ﬁt from CABG compared with PCI ( 1,2,4,18). Addi-
tionally, compared with PCI, CABG may be more effectiveat reducing the risk of late spontaneous MI ( 11,19).
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supporting Text
1. The SYNTAX trial, which included 705 patients with
left main stenoses and a range of complexity of disease,showed a signi ﬁcantly higher MACE and cardiac mor-
tality rate at 5 years for the subgroup of patients with
left main and high-complexity disease (de ﬁned as a
SYNTAX score >33) who were treated with PCI ( 1). With
the exception of the SYNTAX trial, the other RCTscomparing PCI with CABG in patients with left maindisease excluded patients with complex disease(6,8,20). Individual factors that contribute to anatomic
complexity (severe tortuosity, heavy calci ﬁcation,
complex bifurcation or trifurcation lesion, aorto-ostial
stenosis, thrombotic lesion, etc.) are listed in Table 6 .
In choosing between CABG and PCI, it is important touse the Heart Team to deter mine the optimal revas-cularization strategy, with speci ﬁc considerations of
anatomic complexity, medication compliance, and pa-tient preference.
2. In the SYNTAX trial, which randomized patients with
multivessel disease to a strategy of CABG or PCI with
DES, the SYNTAX score was used a priori to de ﬁne the
complexity of disease in enrolled patients. Althoughthe SYNTAX trial reported si milar mortality rates with
CABG and PCI in the overall group of patients,extended follow-up of the SYNTAX trial found a 40%higher mortality rate with PCI in the group of patientswith triple-vessel disease ( 4). Several analyses found
that the extent and diffuseness of CAD on angiography,
as evaluated qualitatively by visual assessment or
quantitatively with the SYNTAX score ( 3), predicted a
survival advantage of CABG over PCI ( 5). Speci ﬁcally,
the all-cause mortality rate observed after CABG waslower than that observed after PCI in patients with adiffuse CAD –associated high SYNTAX score of $33
(2,4,5). In patients with SYNTAX scores <33, there was
no difference in mortality rate ( 2-5). Of note, the SYN-
TAX trial included patients with ﬁrst-generation DES,
and signi ﬁcant progress has been made in stent design
since this trial.
8.2. Patients With Diabetes
Recommendations for Patients With Diabetes
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplement 14 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1A1. In patients with diabetes and multivessel CAD wi th the involvement of the LAD, who are appropriate
candidates for CABG, CABG (with a LIMA to the LAD) is recommended in preference to PCI to reducemortality and repeat revascularizations ( 1-8).
2a B-NR2. In patients with diabetes who have multivessel CA D amenable to PCI and an indication for revasculari-
zation and are poor candidates for surgery, PCI ca n be useful to reduce long-term ischemic outcomes
(9,10).
2b B-R3. In patients with diabetes who have left main steno sis and low- or intermediate-complexity CAD in the
rest of the coronary anatomy, PCI may be consider ed an alternative to CABG to reduce major adverse
cardiovascular outcomes ( 5,11).
Synopsis
Revascularization decisions in patients with diabetes
and multivessel CAD are complex and are optimized via aHeart Team approach, with consideration of left ventric-ular function, patient preferences, symptoms, clinicalpresentation, comorbidities, and expected survival ( 1,12-
14). Diabetes is associated with 2- to 4-fold increased
mortality risk from heart disease, and patients with dia-betes have more aggressive atherosclerosis, more diffusecoronary lesions, smaller coronary vessels, and moreextensive disease. After coronary revascularization, pa-
tients with diabetes experience a higher mortality rate andgreater need for repeat revascularization procedures ( 15).
Clinical trials of patients with diabetes and multivesselCAD have demonstrated that PCI is associated with ahigher mortality rate at 5 years than that associated with
CABG. The survival advantage of CABG becomes evident
after 2 years and attenuates after 8 years, as patientstreated with CABG experience a late mortality catch-up(2,16) .O fn o t e ,C A B Gi sa s s o c i a t e dw i t ha ni n c r e a s e dr i s kLawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e52

of stroke that persists up to 5 years ( 17). The need for
repeat revascularization is h igher after PCI, regardless of
the use of latest-generation DES ( 1,4-8).
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Multiple RCTs comparing PCI with CABG in patients
with multivessel CAD have included patients with
diabetes ( 1-3)o rh a v ep r e s p e c i ﬁed patients with dia-
b e t e sa sas u b g r o u po fi n t e r e s t( 4,5,7). The FREEDOM
trial was the largest study, comparing CABG with PCIexclusively in 1900 patients with diabetes ( 4,5,7). In-
clusion criteria for the FREEDOM trial were multivesseldisease with stenosis of 70% in $2 major epicardial
vessels involving at least 2 separate territories and
without left main stenosis. After enrollment, 82% ofpatients in the PCI group and 85% of patients in the
CABG group had 3-vessel disease, and 91% of patients
had involvement of the LAD artery. At 5-year follow-up, the all-cause mortality rate was higher in patientstreated with PCI than in those treated with CABG;however, the cardiovascular mortality rate was notstatistically different between the groups. There wasno statistical interaction between SYNTAX score,revascularization strategy, or mortality rate, which
suggests that a bene ﬁtw a sn o t e di r r e s p e c t i v eo ft h e
complexity of disease ( 1). In the FREEDOM follow-up
study, the all-cause mortality rate up to 8 years wasalso signi ﬁcantly higher with PCI. A meta-analysis
including individual patient data from 11 RCTsdemonstrated consistent results, with a nearly 50%
higher increased 5-year mortality risk among patientst r e a t e dw i t hP C It h a na m o n gt h o s et r e a t e dw i t hC A B G(4,5,7). A Heart Team discussion may be useful for
determining the optimal app roach to care for patients
with less extensive disease, including those with
double-vessel disease with out involvement of the left
main or LAD artery.
2. Patients with diabetes who a re at high surgical risk and
require coronary revasculari zation are more likely to be
treated with PCI in current practice ( 9). In an observa-
tional registry that included high-risk patients withrefractory ischemia, 5-year survival rates were similar
among those treated with CABG and PCI ( 10).
3. There are no RCTs speci ﬁcally comparing PCI with CABG
in patients with diabetes and left main CAD. However, alarge RCT exclusively enrolled patients with left mainCAD, and the subgroup analysis of patients with dia-betes informs this recommendation ( 13). In the EXCEL
trial, which included patients with left main CAD andlow- or intermediate-complexity CAD, approximately
30% of patients had diabetes. At 3 years, the composite
of death, stroke, or MI was not signi ﬁcantly different
between PCI and CABG among patients with diabetes.However, the all-cause mortality rate was almost 2 timeshigher in the PCI group. There was no interaction be-tween diabetes status and rev ascularization modality.
8.3. Patients With Previous CABG
Recommendations for Patients With Previous CABG
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplement 15 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
2a B-NR1. In patients with previous CABG with a patent LIMA to the LAD who need repeat revascularization, if PCI is
feasible, it is reasonable to choose PCI over CABG ( 1,2).
2a C-LD2. In patients with previous CABG and refractory ang ina on GDMT that is attributable to LAD disease, it is
reasonable to choose CABG over PCI when an internal mammary artery (IMA) can be used as a conduit tothe LAD ( 3,4).
2b B-NR3. In patients with previous CABG and complex CAD, it may be reasonable to choose CABG over PCI when an
IMA can be used as a conduit to the LAD ( 3,4).
Synopsis
A Heart Team approach and shared decision-making
are important in patients who require repeat revascular-
ization after CABG. There are no randomized trials
comparing medical therapy with revascularization in pa-tients with previous CABG. PCI and repeat CABG in pa-tients with previous CABG are associated with higherrates of procedural failure and complications ( 5,6)a n d
worse outcomes than those of patients without previousCABG ( 6-8). The need for any repeat revascularization
after PCI or CABG is itself an independent predictor ofhigher mortality risk ( 9). Factors that in ﬂuence the choice
of revascularization modality include the availability of
the IMA for grafting, a patent graft to the LAD, comorbidconditions, patient factors and preferences, the quality ofthe target vessels, anatomic complexity of the native andgraft disease, and the feasibi lity and risks of the revas-
cularization method.JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee53

Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. In patients with previous CABG, percutaneous inter-
vention of a native vessel or a saphenous vein graft(SVG) is probably indicated in preference to redo CABG,particularly if a LIMA-LAD is not planned or if the pa-tient already has a patent LIMA-LAD, which increasesthe risk of a redo sternotomy. Randomized and retro-spective comparisons of PCI versus repeat CABG showlower in-hospital stroke and mortality rates associated
with PCI ( 2,3), although long-term mortality rates
appeared similar. In circumstances of acute graftclosure, PCI of the native vessel is often performed inpreference to redo CABG ( 10) or treating an acutely
thrombosed graft with fresh suture lines ( 11).
2. A patient with previous CABG faces increased risk
during revascularization via CABG ( 9), including higher
rates of in-hospital death a nd stroke, compared with
patients who undergo revascularization via PCI ( 2,3).
Observational data suggest that the use of CABG overPCI may result in improved long-term outcomes;however, results are inconsistent and not supported byhigh-quality RCTs ( 3,12,13). If PCI is not an option, if apatent IMA to LAD is not present, or if an IMA is
a v a i l a b l et ob eu s e da sac o n d u i tf o rt h eL A D ,C A B Gi so f t e nc h o s e na st h er e v a s c u l a r i z a t i o ns t r a t e g yi np a -tients with previous CABG and refractory angina whoare at an acceptable risk for reoperation ( 3,4).
3. Two large observational studies with propensity
matching in patients with previous CABG and complexCAD inform decisions about revascularization. The ﬁrst
noted that current clinical practice favored redo CABGover PCI for patients at higher risk and with fewerfunctional grafts, more CTOs, and lower systolic func-tion, whereas PCI was favored in patients with a patentLIMA and amenable anatomy ( 3). The second noted
that LIMA grafting to the LAD confers a long-term
survival advantage ( 4). Thus, decisions about revas-
cularization should involve consideration of factorsthat may favor repeat CABG, such as the availability ofan IMA for LAD grafting, ability to provide left mainrevascularization, recurrent restenosis of stents, orhigh-complexity PCI, in such patients.
8.4. DAPT Adherence
Synopsis
In patients undergoing coron ary revascularization,
careful consideration should be given to factors that mayaffect adherence to medicatio ns, including patient pref-
erences and comorbidities, socioeconomic status, andlifestyle factors. Premature cessation of DAPT after PCI isassociated with stent thrombosis and poor outcomes,including death ( 1-10). Therefore, PCI is not favored as the
mode of revascularization among patients manifesting
risk factors for poor adherence.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supporting text
1. Stent thrombosis after PCI is associated with large-
territory MI and poor outcomes, with death ratesas high as 50% for early thrombosis cases ( 1,5,9).
Risk factors for stent thrombosis are many andinclude patient-, lesion-, and treatment-speci ﬁc
factors ( 2). Early DAPT interruption —for bleeding,
procedures, or nonadherence —is a reversible risk
factor that is strongly associated with stent throm-bosis, particularly early after PCI, with the relativeincrease in stent thrombosis rates between 2-fold
and>20-fold ( 2,4,8,10). Given the morbidity and
mortality associated with stent thrombosis and thestrong association of nonuse of DAPT with stentthrombosis, CABG is a safe revascularization optionin patients who are not likely to be adherent toDAPT.
Recommendation for DAPT Adherence
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized in Online Data Supplement 16 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
2a B-NR1. In patients with multivessel CAD amenable to trea tment with either PCI or CABG who are unable to ac-
cess, tolerate, or adhere to DAPT for the appropri ate duration of treatment, CABG is reasonable in
preference to PCI ( 1-10 ).Lawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e54

9. SPECIAL POPULATIONS AND SITUATIONS
9.1. Revascularization in Pregnant Patients
Recommendations for Revascularization in Pregnant Patients
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplement 17 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
2a C-LD1. In pregnant patients with STEMI not caused by spontaneous coronary artery dissection (SCAD), it is
reasonable to perform primary PCI as the preferred revascularization strategy ( 1,2).
2a C-LD2. In pregnant patients with NSTE-ACS, an invasive str ategy is reasonable if medical therapy is ineffective
for the management of life-t hreatening complications ( 1,2).
Synopsis
In pregnant patients, an expanded, multidisciplinary
Heart Team approach is often used to determine theappropriate coronary revascularization treatment, withconsideration of patient preferences, comorbidities, andclinical status. Decisions in pregnant patients are often
difﬁcult and must include consideration of the risk to the
u n b o r nf e t u s ,a sw e l la st h er i s k sa n db e n e ﬁts to the
mother. Pregnant women are generally excluded from
clinical trials, and therefore there is limited evidence
regarding the safety of antipl atelet agents during preg-
nancy, especially during the third trimester. Low-doseaspirin is generally felt to be safe throughout pregnancy.If clopidogrel is needed, it should be used for the shortestduration possible ( 3,4) with close monitoring. In a recent
systematic review of 39 publications with 42 live births,the outcomes for both mothers and neonates when
exposed to clopidogrel at varying durations throughout
gestation, did not suggest higher than acceptable risk,with a congenital anomaly ra te comparable to background
risk. The evidence regarding t he use of other antiplatelet
agents remains limited ( 4).Recommendation-Speci ﬁcS u p p o r t i v eT e x t
1. The coronary revascularization treatment in the preg-
nant patient with STEMI is typically via PCI ( 5), and
CABG is usually performed when medical therapy or PCI
fails and the mother ’sl i f ei st h r e a t e n e d( 1,2). In a large,
retrospective review of pregnant patients with AMI,STEMI was noted in 42% of th ese patients. Approxi-
mately 25% to 40% of pregnant patients with AMI werereferred for invasive evaluation, and roughly 25% ofpregnant patients received co ronary revascularization
(with most patients receiving PCI). Compared with aconservative approach, an invasive approach for the
treatment of the AMI was associated with a signi ﬁcantly
lower adjusted in-hospital mortality rate.
2. In a large database of pregnant patients with AMI ( 2), a
larger proportion of patients with NSTE-ACS wereconservatively treated. If medical therapy is ineffectivefor the management of these patients because ofongoing ischemia, hemodynamic comprise, or electricalinstability, an invasive approach was noted to be
reasonable ( 2,5,6).
9.2. Revascularization in Older Patients
Recommendation for Revascularization in Older Patients
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized in Online Data Supplement 18 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
1 B-NR1. In older adults, as in all patients, the treatment strategy for CAD should be based on an individual pa-
tient ’s preferences, cognitive function, and life expectancy ( 1,2).
Synopsis
Although the terms “elderly ”or“older ”have been used
to describe various patient-a ge subgroups in the litera-
t u r e ,m o s tc l i n i c a lt r i a l sh a v ed e ﬁned older patients as
those $75 years of age ( 3). Older patients form a vulner-
able subset of patients undergoing coronaryrevascularization because of their more complex pre-
sentations and higher prevalence of comorbidities ( 4,5). In
addition, they have an increased risk of bleeding compli-cations and stroke after PCI ( 3,6-8). However, the optimal
treatment for older patients with an indication for revas-
cularization remains poorly de ﬁned because most studiesJACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee55

have excluded older patient s and included only low-risk
populations ( 9).
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Older patients constitute a growing, high-risk popula-
tion with increased rates of adverse events ( 10-12 ).
These patients pose additional challenges because ofadverse interactions caused by polypharmacy and age-
related changes in cardiovascular function and coro-
nary anatomy ( 5,13-15 ). Although older patients bene ﬁt
from revascularization to the same, if not greater,extent as younger patients ( 16), the optimal strategy
should be chosen according to patient-centered goals ofcare ( 17). Subgroup analyses fr om recent randomized
trials have demonstrated that relative outcomes afterPCI and CABG are comparable in older patients, withCABG being better at achieving complete revasculari-zation, whereas PCI is preferred for frail patients at
higher risk of periprocedural events ( 18-21 ). Careful
consideration of risks and bene ﬁts using a Heart Team,
a n di na c c o r d a n c ew i t ht h ep a t i e n t ’s preferences, while
accounting for frailty and cognitive status, is vital indecisions about the appropriate revascularization planfor older patients.
9.3. Revascularization in Patients With Chronic Kidney Disease
(CKD)
Recommendations for Revascularization in Patients With CKD
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplement 19 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 C-LD1. In patients with CKD undergoing contrast media inj ection for coronary angiography, measures should be
taken to minimize the risk of contrast -induced acute kidney injury (AKI) ( 1-3).
1 C-EO2. In patients with STEMI and CKD, coronary angiogra phy and revascularizatio n are recommended, with
adequate measures to reduce the risk of AKI.
2a B-NR3. In high-risk patients with NSTE-ACS and CKD, it is reasonable to perform co ronary angiography and
revascularization, with adequate measures to reduce the risk of AKI ( 4,5).
2a C-EO4. In low-risk patients with NSTE-ACS and CKD, it is reasonable to weigh the risk of coronary angiography
and revascularization against the potential bene ﬁt.
3: No bene ﬁt B-R5. In asymptomatic patients with stable CAD and CKD, routine angiography and revascularization are not
recommended if there is no compelling indication ( 6).
Synopsis
Patients with CKD constitute a growing subset of the
population ( 7,8) and have been found to have worse out-
comes after AMI or PCI ( 9,10). Risk of cardiovascular death
has been shown to be inversely proportional to estimatedglomerular ﬁltration rate, with impaired renal function
being an independent predictor of cardiovascular risk(11,12). Although about 30% to 40% of all patients under-
going PCI have concomitant CKD ( 13,14), data on optimal
treatment strategies in this population remain scarce
because most RCTs have traditionally excluded patientswith severe CKD. Patients with CKD who present with ACSare less likely to receive GDMT or invasive angiographythan are patients with normal renal function, and thelikelihood of undergoing cardiovascular interventionsdecreases with increasing severity of CKD ( 9,15-17 ). Before
coronary angiogra phy is performed, the risks of AKI and
the bene ﬁts of obtaining diagnostic information should be
carefully considered. Preexisting CKD is the strongest in-dependent risk factor for the development of AKI, with ahigher stage of CKD associat ed with incrementally higher
risk ( 6,7).
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Adequate hydration ( 18-20 ) and minimization of the
volume of contrast media ( 21-23 ) remain the principal
strategies for contrast-induced nephropathy preven-tion ( Table 8 ). High-dose statins before diagnostic
catheterization have been demonstrated to reduce the
occurrence of contrast-induced AKI ( 21,24,25)b e c a u s e
of their pleotropic effects that decrease systemicinﬂammation, possibly by decreasing the synthesis of
endothelin-1 and inhibiting tissue-factor expression bymacrophages ( 26-29 ). Atheroembolism may have a role
i nA K Ia f t e rP C I( 30), and a transfemoral approach may
increase this risk because of the proximity to renal ar-
teries ( 31). Consistent with this, the use of radial access
has been shown to signi ﬁcantly reduce the risk of AKI
c o m p a r e dw i t hf e m o r a la c c e s s( 31-33 ). All other mea-
sures believed to reduce the risk of contrast-inducedLawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e56

AKI have not demonstrated signi ﬁcant clinical bene ﬁt
(12,31).
2. On the basis of multiple randomized trials, prompt
coronary angiogra phy and revascularization have been
recommended for patients presenting with STEMI ( 34).
However, patients with severe CKD were oftenexcluded from these studies because of their higherrisk of adverse ischemic and bleeding events, as well as
t h e i rh i g h e rr i s ko fc o n t r a s t-induced AKI. Nonetheless,
the mortality bene ﬁt of revascularization in patients
with STEMI and CKD outweighs the risk of adverseoutcomes when adequate measures to reduce the riskof AKI are taken before, during, and after theprocedure.
3. Several observational studies have reported worse in-
hospital outcomes and long-term mortality rate for
patients with NSTE-ACS and CKD than for those
without CKD ( 35-37 ). Despite this, an early invasive
strategy in high-risk patients with NSTE-ACS wasshown to be associated with signi ﬁcant risk reduction
versus a noninvasive approach ( 9). Although the use
of PCI for NSTE-ACS has been found to decrease withincreasing CKD severity, revascularization in thesepatients is associated wi th a lower in-hospitalmortality rate than that seen with medical manage-
ment ( 5).
4. Although a routine invasive approach has been shown
to improve outcomes in patients presenting withNSTE-ACS, this risk reduction was evident mostly inthe high-risk subgroups ( 9). The risk –bene ﬁtr a t i oo f
revascularization in patients with low-risk NSTE-ACSremains uncertain because of limited evidence.
Therefore, in low-risk patients with NSTE-ACS with
CKD, astute clinical judgment weighing the trade-offbetween risks and bene ﬁts is required to determine
the optimal approach in this patient subgroup.
5. ISCHEMIA-CKD was the ﬁrst randomized trial to test
the bene ﬁt of adding cardiac catheterization and, if
feasible, revascularization to GDMT in stable patientswith moderate CKD and at least moderate ischemia ( 6).
With patients randomized to either an invasive or
conservative strategy, an initial invasive strategy didnot demonstrate a reduced risk of clinical outcomes orimproved quality-of-life measures compared with aninitially conservative strategy.
9.4. Revascularization in Patients Before Noncardiac SurgeryTABLE 8 Best Practices in the Catheterization Laborator y for Patients With CKD Undergoing Angiography
nAssess the risk of contrast-induced AKI before the procedure ( 1-3)
nAdminister adequate preprocedural hydration ( 19,20)
nRecord the volume of contrast media administered, and minimize contrast use ( 18,22,23)
nPretreat with high-intensity statins ( 21,24,25)
nUse radial artery if feasible ( 31-33 )
nDo not administer N-acetyl-L-cyste ine to prevent contrast-induced AKI ( 38-40 )
nDo not give prophylactic renal replacement therapy ( 41,42)
nDelay CABG in stable patients after angiography beyond 24 hours when clinically feasible ( 43-45 )
AKI indicates acute kidney injury; CABG, coronary artery bypass graft; and CKD, chronic kidney disease.
Recommendation for Revascularization in Patients Before Noncardiac Surgery
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized in Online Data Supplement 20 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
3: No bene ﬁt B-R1. In patients with non –left main or noncomplex CAD who are undergoing noncardiac surgery, routine
coronary revascularization is not recommended sole ly to reduce perioperative cardiovascular events ( 1).
Synopsis
Patients with signi ﬁcant CAD who are undergoing high-
risk surgery, such as solid organ transplantation ( 2)o r
vascular surgery ( 3), have an increased incidence of peri-
operative cardiovascular events. Routine prophylacticrevascularization does not reduce the risk of death orcardiovascular events ( 1). Clinical studie sh a v ee x c l u d e dor randomized few patients with high-risk coronary
anatomy such as unprotected left main and multivesselCAD. Additionally, these studies did not include patientsreferred for solid organ transp lantation. In such patients, a
Heart Team approach would b e used to determine the
risks and bene ﬁts of revascularization. In symptomatic
patients or patients with other clinical indications forJACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee57

revascularization, coronary revascularization should be
considered in accordance with the recommendationsotherwise provided for such situations, but revasculari-zation should not be done for the sole purpose of reducingperioperative complications.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. One clinical trial has shown a lack of bene ﬁtf o rr o u t i n e
revascularization in patients before vascular surgery(1). The CARP (Coronary Artery Revascularization Pro-
phylaxis) study randomized 510 asymptomatic patientswith$1s i g n i ﬁcant coronary lesion to revascularizationwith PCI or CABG or to medical therapy and found no
difference in 30-day and 1-year rates of death or MI.Most patients in this study had only single- or 2-vesselC A D ,a n dp a t i e n t sw i t hl e f tm a i nC A D ,l e f tv e n t r i c u l a rejection fraction <20%, or severe aortic stenosis were
excluded ( 1). Nonrandomized patients with unpro-
tected left main CAD who were excluded from the CARPstudy did derive bene ﬁt from revascularization ( 3).
9.5. Revascularization in Patients to Reduce Ventricular
Arrhythmias
Recommendations for Revascularization in Patients to Reduce Ventricular Arrhythmias
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplement 21 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In patients with ventricular ﬁbrillation, polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (VT), or cardiac arrest,
revascularization of signi ﬁcant CAD is recommended to improve survival ( 1-4).
3: No Bene ﬁt C-LD2. In patients with CAD and suspected scar-mediated sustained monomorphic VT, revascularization is not
recommended for the sole purpose of preventing recurrent VT ( 5-9).
Synopsis
In patients with ventricular arrhythmias, the evaluation
for potential ischemic CAD will guide appropriate treat-ment, including coronary revascularization ( 10,11). The
“2017 AHA/ACC/HRS Guideline for Management of Pa-
tients With Ventricular Arrhyt hmias and the Prevention of
Sudden Cardiac Death ”describes situations in which
CABG or PCI may bene ﬁt patients with ischemic CAD ( 12).
Observational studies have shown that revascularization
in patients with life-threatening ventricular arrhythmias
(2,13) and in survivors of cardiac arrest ( 14)i sa s s o c i a t e d
with arrhythmia reductio na n di m p r o v e ds u r v i v a l .
Monomorphic VT may be seen in patients with large AMIs;however, it is often attributab le to reentrant rhythms from
scar and not acute ischemia. Therefore, revascularizationalone has not been shown to improve patient outcomes(15).
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. In patients who survive cardiac arrest or have ventric-
ular ﬁbrillation or polymorphic VT, revascularization
with CABG ( 3)o rP C I( 2) is associated with a lower
likelihood of death ( 1,16). In patients with decreased
left ventricular ejection fraction and ischemic heartdisease amenable to CABG, the risk of sudden cardiacdeath is lower with CABG than with medical therapy
(17,18). Although de ﬁnitive conclusions may not be
drawn from these studies because of the selection andsurvival biases inherent to these observational studies,revascularization may reduce the burden of poly-morphic VT and ventricular ﬁbrillation, resulting in
improved survival.
2. In contrast to ventricular ﬁbrillation and polymorphic
VT, monomorphic VT in the nonacute setting is typi-
cally attributable to scar-related reentry or increased
automaticity, rather than coronary artery ischemia ( 19).
There are limited reports of AMIs presenting withmonomorphic VT ( 20), isolated coronary artery
ischemia causing isolated bundle-branch VT that issuccessfully treated with PCI ( 21), and exercise-induced
VT associated with ischemia that resolves after CABG(19,22). Retrospective studies show an association of
incomplete or unsuccessful revascularization of CAD
with a higher VT burden and worse outcomes, butthe association is most likely because of patient-levelfactors rather than the success of the intervention(1,9,23). In numerous large cohort studies, elective
coronary artery revascularization alone has not beenshown to reduce ventricular arrhythmias in stablepatients ( 5-8).Lawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e58

9.6. Revascularization in Patients With SCAD
Recommendations for Revascularization in Patients With SCAD
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplement 22 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
2b C-LD1. In patients with SCAD who have hemodynamic inst ability or ongoing ischemia despite conservative
therapy, revascularization may be considered if feasible ( 1-5).
3: Harm C-LD2. Routine revascularization for SCAD should not be performed ( 1-5).
Synopsis
SCAD is characterized by the interruption of the coro-
nary artery intimal layer and intramural hematoma,
causing vessel compression, and typically presenting as anACS. Although most dissections will heal without inter-vention, a notable subset is associated with ongoingsymptomatic ischemia, which can progress to completeocclusion. Treatment of patients with SCAD is challenging,and guidance from randomized trials is lacking. Observa-
tional studies indicate that most conservatively managed
patients recover without further intervention. In patientswith ongoing ischemia, vessel occlusion, or patientinstability, selective revasc ularization may be necessary.
However, unlike other forms of ACS, routine revasculari-zation for patients with SCAD may not confer the samebene ﬁt. PCI wires may propagate the dissection, and bal-
loons and stents can extend the hematoma and lead to
vessel occlusion. CABG onto a dissected vessel or one with
a propensity to dissect is challenging, and as many as 30%of patients have acute graft closure ( 5). The current state
of the science and best practices for treating SCAD aredescribed in the AHA scienti ﬁcs t a t e m e n t ,w h i c hi sb a s e d
on an evaluation of retrospective studies and expertopinion ( 6).
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Although SCAD will often heal with conservative man-
agement, patients with ongoing ischemia, vessel oc-clusion, or instability may require urgentrevascularization. In a retrospective study of 53 pa-tients with SCAD and presenting with STEMI, 62% un-derwent revascularization with PCI and 7.5% withCABG. Although rates of revascularization and PCI
s u c c e s sw e r el o w e ri np a t i e n t sw i t hS C A Dt h a ni na g e -
m a t c h e dp a t i e n t sw i t hS T E M Ia t t r i b u t a b l et oatherosclerosis, overall sur vival was higher in patients
with SCAD ( 3). A single-center, retrospective study of
189 patients with SCAD reported similar mortality ratesat 5 years with a strategy of revascularization and withconservative care. In this cohort of patients, there was ahigher rate of emergency or urgent CABG in patientswith a patent vessel when they were treated with PCIversus conservative care ( 5). Although there are no
RCTs comparing revascularization with conservative
care in patients who have failed medical therapy, it is
reasonable to consider revascularization in the pres-ence of ongoing ischemia and hemodynamic instability.
2. Three large, single-center retrospective studies of pa-
tients undergoing PCI for SC AD described a failure rate
of 35% to 53% and a need for urgent CABG of 9% to 13%.In these studies, conservativ ely treated patients expe-
rienced recurrent symptoms leading to revasculariza-
tion only 2% to 10% of the time ( 1,2,5,7). Two meta-
analyses evaluated the outcomes of patients who weret r e a t e dc o n s e r v a t i v e l yc o m p a r e dw i t ht h o s ew h ow e r eacutely revascularized ( 1,4). There were no differences
in short- or long-term mortality rate, MI, heart failure,or SCAD recurrence between the groups. However, inthe 3 largest retrospective studies, there was a strong
indication that there were more cardiovascular events
in patients who had a ﬁrst-line revascularization strat-
egy. These studies are limited by selection and treat-ment biases, as revascularization was typicallyperformed on higher-risk patients who were more likelyto have an occluded artery ( 2,5,7). Nevertheless, despite
these limitations, the data support a conservativemanagement approach in clinically stable patients.
9.7. Revascularization in Patients With Cardiac Allografts
Recommendation for Revascularization in Patients With Cardiac Allografts
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
2a C-LD1. In patients with cardiac allograft vasculopathy an d severe, proximal, discrete coronary lesions, revas-
cularization with PCI is reasonable ( 1,2).JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee59

Synopsis
In patients after orthotopic h eart transplantation, the
onset of allograft vasculopathy presents a challengingtreatment dilemma. Cardiac allograft vasculopathy is amajor cause of death after the ﬁrst year following ortho-
topic heart transplantation ( 3-5). Cardiac allograft vas-
culopathy is often diffuse and characterized by concentricand rapidly progressive intimal hyperplasia ( 6,7). Multiple
immunologic and nonimmunologic risk factors have beenlinked to the accelerated progression of disease ( 8,9).
Treatment options are limit e d ,w i t hr e t r a n s p l a n t a t i o n
being the only de ﬁnitive therapy for cardiac allograft
vasculopathy ( 10). However, the scarcity of donor organs
and worse outcomes, compared with initial trans-
plantation, remain important limitations ( 11,12). Revas-
cularization with PCI serves as a palliative treatmentoption in patients with focal disease ( 2,13). Studies have
demonstrated lower periprocedural and intermediate-term mortality rates with stent implantation than withballoon angioplasty ( 9).
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Because the pathogenesis of cardiac allog raft vascul-
opathy involves more diffuse intimal hyperplasia thanfocal atherosclerotic plaques, rates of death and MIremain higher in these patients ( 13,14). Use of PCI can
be bene ﬁcial in patients with cardiac allograft vascul-
opathy who present with severe, proximal, discretelesions ( 1,2). Although DES have demonstrated a clear
bene ﬁt over bare-metal stents (BMS) for native CAD,
patients with cardiac allograft vasculopathy were notincluded in these trials. However, there is a signaltoward better outcomes with DES, especially with re-
gard to the occurrence of restenosis ( 4,15,16).
9.8. Revascularization in Patients Before Transcatheter Aortic
Valve Replacement (TAVR)
9.8.1. Special Considerations Before Transcatheter Valve
Therapy
Recommendations for revascularization in patients before
TAVR should be accessed in the 2020 valvular heartdisease guideline ( 1).
9.9. Revascularization in Patients With Anomalous Coronary
Artery
Coronary artery anomalies are among the most common
congenital cardiovascular abnormalities. These includethe anomalous aortic origin of a coronary artery, coronaryﬁstula, and myocardial bridg e. Natural history and pre-
sentation can be extremely variable, and much of the
historical data from autopsy and surgical studies are now
being more fully informed by increasing diagnosticcapability ( 1,2). Sudden cardiac death and myocardial
ischemia remain the major clinical concerns. The pre-sentation and most appropriate management of thesepatients was reviewed extensively in the “2018 AHA/ACC
Guideline for the Managemen t of Adults With Congenital
Heart Disease, ”which has provided guidance that re
ﬂects
the current state of the evolving evidence ( 3).
10. GENERAL PROCEDURAL ISSUES FOR PCI
10.1. Radial and Femoral Approaches for PCI
Recommendations for Radial and Femoral Approaches for PCI
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplement 23 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1A1. In patients with ACS undergoing PCI, a radial approa ch is indicated in preferenc e to a femoral approach to
r e d u c et h er i s ko fd e a t h ,v a s c u l a rc o m p l i c a t i o n s ,o rb l e e d i n g( 1-4).
1A2. In patients with SIHD undergoing PCI, the radial app roach is recommended to reduce access site bleeding
and vascular complications ( 4-7).
Synopsis
Over the past decade, the proportion of patients un-
dergoing radial artery catheterization and PCI hasincreased exponentially ( 8). Patients prefer the transradial
approach ( 9) ,a n dt h i sa p p r o a c ho f f e r st h ea d v a n t a g eo f
earlier time to ambulation, lower rate of vascular andbleeding complications, and improved cardiovascularoutcomes in patients with ACS ( 4) .A ni m p o r t a n tc a v e a tt o
radial access trials ( 1,2,9) is that the treating physicians
were required to have experience in radial artery access,and therefore, it is not surprising that femoral crossover
rates were notably low among patients assigned to radial
access ( 1-4). For this reason, it is encouraged that all op-
erators gain experience in radial artery access so that theym a yu l t i m a t e l ya c q u i r et h es k i lls needed to have expertise
with this approach. The decision to use the transradialapproach should be tempered with the possibility that theradial artery may be needed for bypass grafting in thefuture. In patients for whom there is a high likelihood of
future CABG, the choice of vascular access may requireLawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e60

discussion with the patient and the cardiac surgeon. In
centers where expertise in the transradial approach isunavailable, or in those patients who are unable to getradial artery catheterizatio n because of anatomic or clin-
ical limitations, femoral artery access remains the default
strategy.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. The MATRIX (Minimizi ng Adverse Haemorrhagic
Events by TRansradial Access Site and SystemicImplementation of an gioX Access) trial ( 2)d e m o n -
strated a signi ﬁcantly lower rate of the coprimary
endpoint of net adverse clinical events (30-day death,
nonfatal infarction and stroke, and non-CABG major
bleeding) among patients with ACS randomized to thetransradial approach than among those randomized tothe transfemoral approach. T his difference was driven
by a lower rate of bleeding events and a lower 30-daymortality rate. A prespeci ﬁed subgroup analysis of pa-
tients with STEMI enrolled in RIVAL (Trial of Trans-radial versus Trans-femoral Percutaneous Coronary
Intervention Access Site Approach in Patients with
Unstable Angina or Myocardial Infarction Managedwith an Invasive Strategy) demonstrated a lower mor-
tality rate at 30 days with transradial access. A meta-analysis of the RCT supported these ﬁndings and re-
ported lower rates of mortality and bleeding with radialaccess in patients with ACS ( 3,4). Although the SAFARI-
STEMI (Safety and Ef ﬁcacy of Femoral Access versus
Radial for Primary Percutan eous Intervention in ST-
Elevation Myocardial Infarction) trial showed no dif-ference in 30-day mortality rate between radial andfemoral access, this trial was stopped early for futilitya n de n r o l l e dl e s st h a nh a l fi t sp l a n n e ds a m p l es i z e( 10).
Of note, in patients with a high likelihood of needingfuture CABG, radial access of the dominant artery will
allow preservation of the nondominant radial artery for
use as a bypass graft.
2. In patients undergoing coronary angiography or PCI
without ACS, the transradial approach signi ﬁcantly
reduces bleeding and vascular access site complica-tions but has not been shown to signi ﬁcantly reduce
rates of MACE or mortality ( 4).
10.2. Choice of Stent Type
Recommendation for Choice of Stent Type
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized in Online Data Supplement 24 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
1A1. In patients undergoing PCI, DES should be used in pr eference to BMS to prevent restenosis, MI, or acute
stent thrombosis ( 1-4).
Synopsis
Earlier studies comparing outcomes with ﬁrst-
generation DES and BMS reported an increase in latestent thrombosis and increased mortality rate with DES ( 5-
8). Over the past 2 decades, there has been a signi ﬁcant
evolution in DES technology, including the optimizationof drug, polymer, and stent design, which has supportedthe safety as well as the ef ﬁcacy of newer DES. To make
sense of the small absolute differences between stent
types, several large meta-analyses have been completed(1-4) and have suggested that the currently available DES
have higher ef ﬁcacy and safety and lower restenosis rates
than both ﬁrst-generation DES and BMS ( 1-4).
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. In the evaluation of early or late stent thrombosis,
several meta-analyses suggest that stents can beranked from more safe to less safe as follows:
durable-polymer DES $biodegradable-polymer DES
>BMS ( 1-4). A meta-analysis of individual-level
data of 20 RCTs (N ¼26,616), in which 29% of pa-
tients had SIHD, 14% had unstable angina, 25% hadNSTEMI, and 28% had STEMI ( 1), con ﬁrmed a
signi ﬁcantly reduced risk of MI and stent throm-
bosis, as well as a trend toward a lower cardiac
mortality rate, with a newer-generation DES
compared with a BMS. Newer-generation DES weredeﬁned as any DES released after the original
sirolimus-eluting or paclitaxel-eluting DES. For thisreason, there are limited roles for the use of BMSexcept for unusual circumstances, such as a lack ofDES availability or unique patient circumstances thatwarrant extremely short-duration DAPT (i.e., <1
month).JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee61

10.3. Use of Intravascular Imaging
Recommendations for Use of Intravascular Imaging
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplement 25 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
2a B-R1. In patients undergoing coronary stent implantation, IVUS can be useful for procedural guidance,
particularly in cases of left main or complex cor onary artery stenting, to reduce ischemic events ( 1-10 ).
2a B-R2. In patients undergoing coronary stent implant ation, OCT is a reasonable alternative to IVUS for
procedural guidance, except in ostial left main disease ( 11-13 ).
2a C-LD3. In patients with stent failure, IVUS or OCT is reas onable to determine the mechanism of stent failure
(14-17 ).
Synopsis
Because of limitations in angiography, intracoronary
imaging can be a useful tool to guide coronary stent im-plantation, particularly in cases involving the left mainartery or complex lesions. IV US enables full-thickness
visibility of the vessel wall, enabling pre-PCI assessmentof plaque burden, extent of calci ﬁcation, lesion length,
and external elastic lamina diameter for stent sizing and
post-PCI assessment of minimum stent area, malap-
position, underexpansion, tissue protrusion, edge disease,and edge dissection ( 18,19). OCT uses infrared light to
generate high-resolution images of the vessel wall, withparticular advantages in assessing calcium thickness,lipid, thrombus, ﬁbroatheroma, and plaque rupture, as
well as stent strut neointimal thickness and apposition,and edge dissections ( 20). However, OCT has more limited
depth of imaging. It also requires blood clearance through
the use of contrast injection, which diminishes its use inostial left main disease. IVUS and OCT can assist withassessing the need for lesion preparation, stent sizing,minimizing geographic miss, v erifying stent expansion,
evaluating complications, and identifying causes of stentfailure ( 20).
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. In patients undergoing PCI, multiple meta-analyses
(2,3,21-23 ) have shown a reduction in MACE with
IVUS-guided versus angiographic-guided PCI. The UL-TIMATE (Intravascular Ultra s o u n dG u i d e dD r u gE l u t i n g
Stents Implantation in “All-Comers ”Coronary Lesions)
trial, which was the largest trial of routine IVUS-guidedPCI, demonstrated a lower rate of target-vessel failure
(cardiac death, target-vessel infarction, and clinically
driven target-vessel revas cularization) with IVUS-
guided PCI than with angiographic-guided PCI at 12months ( 6). Additionally, at 3 years, there was a
signi ﬁcantly lower rate of stent thrombosis and target-
vessel revascularization with IVUS-guided PCI ( 10).Most of the RCTs focusing on the use of IVUS in com-
plex lesions (left main, CTOs, and long lesions) weresmall and not powered to evaluate clinical endpoints.Some of these trials have reported lower MACE withIVUS-guided PCI in long lesions ( 4), CTOs ( 8), or left
main stenting ( 5). A meta-analysis of RCTs of complex
lesions also demonstrated lower rates of MACE, target-vessel revascularization, and target-lesion revasculari-
zation when IVUS guidance was used ( 1).
2. The ILUMIEN (Optical Coherence Tomography
Compared to Intravascular Ultrasound and Angiographyto Guide Coronary Stent Implantation: a MulticenterRandomized Trial in Percutaneous Coronary Interven-tion) study showed noninferiority of OCT comparedwith IVUS with respect to the primary endpoint of post-
PCI minimum stent area, with similarly low rates of
procedural MACE ( 11). The OPINION (Optical Frequency
Domain Imaging Versus Intravascular Ultrasound inPercutaneous Coronary In tervention) study showed
noninferiority of OCT- compared with IVUS-guided PCIfor the combined endpoint of cardiac death, target-vessel MI, and ischemia-driven target-lesion revascu-larization at 1 year ( 24). The DOCTORS (Does Optical
Coherence Tomography Optimize Results of Stenting)
trial demonstrated that, compared with angiography-
guided PCI, OCT-guided PCI resulted in improvedpost-PCI FFR ( 12). Randomized and registry data have
s h o w nt h a ta nO C Tm i n i m u ms t e n ta r e ao f <4.5 to 5.0
mm
2is an independent predictor of MACE ( 25,26). The
ILUMIEN IV (Optical Coherence Tomography [OCT]Guided Coronary Stent Implantation Compared toAngiography: a Multicenter Randomized Trial in PCI)
trial is an ongoing trial designed to evaluate clinical
outcomes in patients with OCT-guided PCI versus
angiography-guided PCI ( 11).
3. A combination of stent-, procedure-, and patient-
related factors are involved in the pathophysiology ofstent thrombosis or restenosis ( 14,27). Early stentLawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e62

thrombosis is more commo nly a result of residual
target-lesion thrombus, sten t failure, or nonadherence
to DAPT, whereas late stent t h r o m b o s i si sa s s o c i a t e d
with inadequate neointimal coverage or incompletehealing. Assessment of the cause of stent thrombosis
with intracoronary imaging is important to guide sub-
sequent treatment. Similarly, advanced imaging tech-niques have an important rol e in detecting underlying
mechanical and pathophysiological factors thatcontribute to in-stent restenosis (ISR), such as neo-i n t i m a lh y p e r p l a s i a ,s t e n tu n d e r e x p a n s i o n ,a n df r a c -tures ( 14,15). Detailed intrastent visualization allows
new possibilities for tissue characterization and mayhelp better identify patients at risk of ISR ( 28). Registry
and case series data have demonstrated that IVUS andOCT can be useful for evaluating the mechanisms of
stent restenosis and stent thrombosis ( 16,17,29,30).
OCT is better at differentiating between stent-relatedmechanisms, whereas IVUS is preferred for in-depthvessel wall characterization ( 30,31).
10.4. Thrombectomy
Recommendation for Thrombectomy
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized in Online Data Supplement 26 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
3: No Bene ﬁtA1. In patients with STEMI, routine aspiration thrombectomy before primary PCI is not useful ( 1-5).
Synopsis
Many patients with STEMI will have thrombotic occlu-
sion of the infarct artery on the initial angiogram. There-fore, it is natural to consider the use of a device that woulddecrease thrombus burden to decrease the risk of distal
embolization and the no-re ﬂow phenomenon. However,
patients in trials with STEMI undergoing primary PCI didnot derive any clinical bene ﬁt from routine rheolytic
thrombectomy ( 6,7). Additionally, although the initial
studies of aspiration thrombectomy in STEMI demon-strated an improvement in myo cardial blush grades and
rates of ST-segment –elevation resolution ( 8-10 ), larger
studies have not demonstrated improved cardiovascular
outcomes with thrombus aspiration ( 1-5).
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supporting Text
1. Patients enrolled in contemporary trials did not derive a
bene ﬁt of reduction in infarct size ( 5) or improvement in
death, reinfarction, stent thrombosis, or target-lesionrevascularization at 30 days or 1 year ( 1,4) or cardio-
vascular death, recurrent MI, cardiogenic shock, orNYHA Class IV heart failure at 3 months or 1 year ( 2,3)
with aspiration thrombecto my compared with routine
stenting. In the TOTAL (Thrombectomy with PCI vs. PCIAlone in patients with STEMI) trial, patients who wereassigned to aspiration thrombectomy were found to
have a small but statistically signi ﬁcant increased risk of
stroke ( 2,3). A patient-level meta-analysis found no
signi ﬁc a n tr e d u c t i o ni nc a r d i o v a s c u l a rd e a t ha t3 0d a y s
with routine aspiration thrombectomy but did ﬁnd a
t r e n dt o w a r dah i g h e rr a t eo fs t r o k e( 11). Moreover, in
the subgroup of patients with high thrombus burden,thrombus aspiration was associated with a small butstatistically signi ﬁcant reduced rate of cardiovascular
death and a small but statistically signi ﬁcant increased
rate of stroke. For this reason, additional dedicatedstudies focusing on the selective use of thrombus aspi-ration in patients with high thrombus burden areneeded.
10.5. Treatment of Calci ﬁed Lesions
Recommendations for the Treatment of Calci ﬁed Lesions
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplement 27 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
2a B-R1. In patients with ﬁbrotic or heavily calci ﬁed lesions, plaque modi ﬁcation with rotational atherectomy can
be useful to improve procedural success ( 1-3).
2b B-NR2. In patients with ﬁbrotic or heavily calci ﬁed lesions, plaque modi ﬁcation with orbital atherectomy, balloon
atherotomy, laser angioplasty, or intracoronary l ithotripsy may be considered to improve procedural
success ( 4-8).JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee63

Synopsis
Fibrotic or heavily calci ﬁed lesions can hinder stent
expansion. The presence of calcium deposits thicker than500
mm or calcium involving an arc of the vessel >270/C14on
intravascular imaging predicts the need for lesion modi-
ﬁcation to facilitate stent delivery ( 9). Lesions can be
modi ﬁed by using rotational atherectomy, orbital athe-
rectomy, cutting balloon athero tomy, intracoronary lith-
otripsy, or excimer laser angioplasty. Despite promisingresults from hundreds of small mechanistic studies,dozens of large, randomized trials have shown that theroutine use of atheroablative devices does not improveclinical or angiographic outcomes ( 1-3,10). However, the
use of atheroablative devices may enhance procedural
success in speci ﬁcc i r c u m s t a n c e s .
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Rotational atherectomy excavates inelastic athero-
sclerotic tissue through the use of a diamond-tippedburr that rotates at high speeds. Although older
studies have shown that the use of rotational atherec-
tomy is associated with incr eased rates of restenosis ( 3)
and increased late lumen loss ( 1), RCTs have demon-
strated enhanced stent delivery and expansion inheavily calci ﬁed vessels with rotational atherectomy as
compared with the use of conventional balloons ( 1)o r
cutting or sculpting balloons ( 2). For this reason,
despite the lack of data to support improved long-termoutcomes with rotational atherectomy, rotational
atherectomy remains an important tool in certain sit-uations to properly “prepare ”a lesion for stenting.
2. Orbital atherectomy has many features in common
with rotational atherectom y and has similar clinical
indications for use ( 4,5). Cutting balloons ( 6)a n d
scoring balloons ( 7)s e c t i o na t h e r o m a t o u sp l a q u e
t h r o u g hat e c h n i q u ec a l l e db a l l o o na t h e r o t o m y ,b u ttheir value may be limited to the technical advantage
of slipping less often than c onventional balloons in
ostial lesions or lesions associated with ISR. Excimerlaser coronary angioplasty uses a photo-acousticmechanism ( 11) that may facilitate the treatment of
calciﬁed lesions or nonexpandable stents ( 12,13). In
certain lesion subsets, such as stent underexpansionthat cannot be dilated with high-pressure balloon in-ﬂations, high-energy laser angioplasty can disrupt the
calciﬁc lesion beneath the stent struts and facilitate
stent expansion ( 14) .T h ee v i d e n c eb a s ef o ra d d i t i o n a l
techniques to modify calci ﬁed or ﬁbrotic lesions,
including atherectomy, cut ting balloons, or laser, are
limited to registry studies and case series ( 10). Other
potentially emerging modalities include intracoronarylithotripsy ( 8,15).
10.6. Treatment of Saphenous Vein Graft (SVG) Disease
(Previous CABG)
Recommendations for Treatment of SVG Disease (Previous CABG)
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplement 28 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
2a B-R1. In select patients with previous CABG undergoing PCI of a SVG, the use of an embolic protection device,
when technically feasible, is reasonable to d ecrease the risk of di stal embolization ( 1-3).
2a B-NR2. In patients with previous CABG, if PCI of a diseased nat ive coronary artery is feasible, then it is reasonable
to choose PCI of the native coronary artery over PCI of the severely diseased SVG ( 4-6).
3: No Bene ﬁt C-LD3. In patients with a chronic occlusion of a SVG, percutaneous revascularization of the SVG should not be
performed ( 7,8).
Synopsis
In patients with previous CABG undergoing PCI of an
SVG, the incidence of MACE is signi ﬁcantly higher than
those with native coronary artery PCI because of the
higher risk of procedural complications, including the no-reﬂow phenomenon and periprocedural MI ( 6). Compared
with native coronary arteries, atherosclerotic plaques inS V G sa r em o r ed i f f u s e ,w i t ht h i n n e r ,m o r ef r i a b l e ﬁbrous
caps that increase the risk of distal debris embolizationduring PCI ( 9). In several large prospective registries, pa-
tients who underwent SVG PCI were more likely to haveno-re ﬂow ( 5), stent thrombosis, ischemia-driven target-
vessel revascularization, increased overall adjustedMACE, and increased risk of death ( 4,5,10)i nl o n g - t e r m
follow-up than were those w ho underwent non-SVG PCI.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. The term “embolic protection devices ”refers to the
group of devices designed to prevent distal emboliza-
tion. The SAFER (Saphenous vein graft Angioplasty
Free of Emboli Randomized) trial comparing the out-comes of SVG PCI with the use of an embolic protectionLawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e64

device (Medtronic Guardwire, Minneapolis, MN) with
conventional stenting of the SVG demonstrated a sig-niﬁcant reduction in the primary endpoint of death,
MI, emergency bypass, or target-lesion revasculariza-tion at 30 days with the GuardWire distal protection
device ( 1). A subsequent study comparing different
embolic protection devices reported noninferiority oft h eF i l t e r W i r eE Xd e v i c e( B o s t o nS c i e n t i ﬁc, Marl-
borough, MA) to the GuardWire ( 2). In contemporary
PCI, embolic protection devices are used in only 14% to21% of patients ( 11,12), and only the ﬁlter-based devices
are currently in use. Observational studies exploringthe“real-world ”bene ﬁts of embolic protection devices
provide con ﬂicting ﬁn d i n g s ,w i t h1s t u d ys h o w i n gn o
bene ﬁt of embolic protection devices and another
showing signi ﬁcant harm when embolic protection
devices are not used ( 11,12). A meta-analysis of 2 ran-
domized studies and 6 observational reports showedno bene ﬁt with the use of embolic protection devices,
although selection biases and unmeasured con-founders are important limitations of these observa-
tional studies ( 13).
2. In patients with previous CABG who require PCI, two-
thirds of these procedures are performed on thenative artery instead of the bypass graft ( 4,5). Although
there are no randomized studies comparing PCI of adiseased native artery with PCI of an SVG, observa-tional studies have shown that intervening in a native
coronary artery instead of an SVG is associated withimproved outcomes. In a larg e prospective registry,
patients with prior CABG who underwent SVG PCI hadhigher rates of cardiac death, stent thrombosis,
ischemia-driven target-vessel revascularization, and
overall MACE at 2 years than did those who underwentPCI of the native vessel ( 10). The risk of MACE
remained elevated even after adjustment for baselinevariables and propensity matching ( 10). Another
o b s e r v a t i o n a ls t u d y ,e x a m i n i n gp a t i e n t sw i t hp r i o rCABG undergoing PCI, reported higher rates of in-hospital death, no-re ﬂow, periprocedural MI, and
cardiogenic shock in patients who underwent SVG PCI
than in patients who underwent PCI of the nativevessel. At 3 years, SVG PCI was associated with higherrates of post discharge death, MI, and repeat revascu-larization than those seen with native coronary PCI ( 5).
3. In patients with chronic occlusion of an SVG, PCI of the
SVG has been associated with low success rates andexcessive risk of needing repeat intervention ( 7,8).
However, experienced operators have used occluded
SVGs as conduits for retrograde recanalization of CTOsin native coronary arteries ( 13).
10.7. Treatment of CTO
Recommendation for Treatment of CTO
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized in Online Data Supplement 29 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
2b B-R1. In patients with suitable anatomy who have refractory angina on medical therapy, after treatment of non-
CTO lesions, the bene ﬁt of PCI of a CTO to improve symptoms is uncertain ( 1-4).
Synopsis
A CTO is found in approximately one-quarter of pa-
tients undergoing coronary angiography ( 5,6). Consider-
able progress in the technical aspects of interventionalrevascularization has yielded success rates in excess of
80% in the hands of skilled operators ( 7). However, the 30-
day mortality rate after CTO PCI is 1.3%, and perforationsoccur in 4.8% of cases ( 8). Enthusiasm for treating these
lesions was fueled by retrospective data suggestingimproved clinical outcomes for those patients who un-derwent successful recanalization compared with thosewho had failed ( 9). However, RCTs have not demonstrated
improved function ( 4,10) and have been equivocal with
regard to symptoms ( 1,2). For this reason, shared decision-
making should inform the treatment of patients with re-fractory angina despite GDMT with remaining CTOcoronary lesion, with careful di scussions of the limitations
of treating these lesions, as well as the potential bene ﬁts.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁcS u p p o r t i v eT e x t
1. Despite considerable retrospective and registry data
suggesting a clinical bene ﬁto fP C Io faC T O ,ac l e a r
demonstration of bene ﬁt from prospective randomized
trials has not been forthcoming ( 11,12). The EXPLORE
(Evaluating Xience and left ventricular function in PCIon occlusions after STEMI) and the REVASC (Random-ized Trial to Assess Regional Left Ventricular FunctionAfter Stent Implantation in Chronic Total Occlusion)trials did not demonstrate any improvement in ven-
tricular function with CTO PCI versus optimal medical
therapy ( 4,10). Although the EURO CTO (Randomized
Multicentre Trial to Compare Revascularization WithJACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee65

Optimal Medical Therapy for the Treatment of Chronic
Total Occlusions) trial demonstrated a greater reduc-tion in angina frequency and improved quality of lifewith PCI of a CTO than with optimal medical therapy(2) ,am u c hl a r g e rt r i a l ,t h eD E C I S I O N - C T O( D r u g -
Eluting Stent Implantation Versus Optimal Medical
Treatment in Patients With Chronic Total Occlusion)trial, did not demonstrate any difference in symptoms
or clinical outcomes with CTO PCI ( 1). Future trials with
more de ﬁnitive endpoints may change the current
landscape ( 3,13,14).
10.8. Treatment of Patients With Stent Restenosis
Recommendations for Treatment o f Patients With Stent Restenosis
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplement 30 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1A1. In patients who develop clinical in-stent restenos is (ISR) for whom repeat PC I is planned, a DES should be
used to improve outcomes if anatomic factors are app ropriate and the patient is able to comply with DAPT
(1-4).
2a C-EO2. In patients with symptomatic recurrent diffuse ISR w i t ha ni n d i c a t i o nf o rr e v a s c u l a r i z a t i o n ,C A B Gc a nb e
useful over repeat PCI to reduce recurrent events.
2b B-NR3. In patients who develop recurrent ISR, brachyt herapy may be considere d to improve symptoms ( 5).
Synopsis
The increasing use of newer-generation DES has led to a
signi ﬁcant reduction in the risk of ISR and subsequent
target-lesion revasculari z a t i o nc o m p a r e dw i t hB M Sa n d
ﬁrst-generation DES ( 6-8). Nevertheless, ISR is still re-
ported in 5% to 10% of patients undergoing PCI ( 9,10). The
primary mechanism of ISR aft er stent implantation is
neointimal hyperplasia, with angiographic and histo-pathological studies demonst rating considerable differ-
ences in tissue characteristics based on the type of stent(11-14 ). The risk of restenosis is also linked to clinical
presentation, patient pro ﬁle, lesion location, and proce-
dural characteristics ( 15,16). Numerous approaches to the
treatment of restenosis have been explored and includeballoon angioplasty, DES, drug-coated balloons, scoring orcutting balloons, vascular brachytherapy, atheroablativetherapies, and CABG. Compared with other therapies, DESappears to provide the most bene ﬁt. However, the type of
ISR (i.e., focal versus diffuse) may also affect the decision
to treat with one modality over another and, therefore,
treatment of ISR should be in dividualized. Importantly,
intensive medical therapy is also vital in these patients.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. In patients with ISR, studies have shown that treatment
with a DES resulted in lower rates of target-vesselrestenosis in follow-up than those seen with BMS or
balloon angioplasty ( 3,4,17). Network meta-analyses
comparing various treatment options (DES, BMS,
vascular brachytherapy, drug-coated balloons, con-
ventional balloons, or rotational atherectomy) haveshown that PCI with a DES was associated with thelowest rates of restenosis and target-vessel revascular-ization. Of the different DES stent types, everolimus-eluting stents appeared to have the best ef ﬁcacy ( 1,2).
In these studies, there were no signi ﬁcant differences in
other clinical outcomes, inc luding death or MI, among
the therapies examined.
2. In patients with recurrent episodes of restenosis
despite repeat PCI with DES, or in patients whohave diffuse ISR in large vessels or a complex presen-tation such as CTO with multivessel disease, CABGmaybe the preferred approach if the anatomy issuitable.
3. In patients who already have multiple stent layers or
have recurrent ISR with an artery that is unfavorable to
receive another DES, who are not good candidates forbypass surgery, vascular brachytherapy provides anadditional tool to aid revascularization ( 5). Vascular
brachytherapy circumvents the need to implantanother stent, and in these challenging situations itremains a reasonable option.Lawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e66

10.9. Hemodynamic Support for Complex PCI
Recommendation for Hemodynamic Support in Complex PCI
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized in Online Data Supplement 31 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
2b B-R1. In selected high-risk patients, elective insertion of an appropriate hemodynamic support device as an
adjunct to PCI may be reasonable to prevent hemodynamic compromise during PCI ( 1,2).
Synopsis
Patients undergoing complex PCI are at risk of hypo-
tension, decompensated hea rt failure, shock, or arrhyth-
mias that may lead to rapid hemodynamic deterioration ordeath. Intra-aortic balloon pump counterpulsation pro-
vides minimal hemodynamic support for PCI but improves
coronary and cerebral perfusion. Its use is limited in pa-tients with severe peripheral artery or aortic disease. Itsadvantages are ease of use and smaller catheter diameter,leading to lower rates of vascular access site complica-tions. The Impella percutaneous left ventricular –assist
devices (Abiomed, Danvers, MA) provide greater leftventricular support. The use of the Impella support de-
vices is limited in patients with left ventricular thrombus,
aortic stenosis, peripheral artery disease, or aortic disease.Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation and the Tandem-Heart (CardiacAssist, Inc, Pittsburgh, PA) devices arerarely used to support complex PCI. New hemodynamicsupport devices are undergoi ng evaluation in clinical
trials.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supporting Text
1. The routine use of hemodynamic support devices for
complex PCI has not been shown to reduce cardiovas-cular events ( 1,2). In the BCIS-1 (Balloon Pump –Assisted
Coronary Intervention) study, there was no differencein the primary composite outcome (death, MI,cerebrovascular event, or rep eat revascularization) with
intra-aortic balloon counterpulsation ( 1). Major proce-
dural complications (mostly hypotension) were lowerwith intra-aortic balloon counterpulsation. The PRO-TECT II (Prospective, Mul ti-center, Randomized
Controlled Trial of the Impella Recover LP 2.5 System
Versus Intra Aortic Balloon Pump [IABP] in PatientsUndergoing Non Emergen t High Risk PCI II) trial,
comparing the Impella System with intra-aortic ballooncounterpulsation for high- risk PCI, was halted for fu-
tility after an interim analysis showed no bene ﬁti nt h e
primary endpoint of MACE ( 2) .C o m p a r e dw i t hb a l l o o n
counterpulsation, Impella provided better hemody-
namic support. Observati onal studies have further
challenged the ef ﬁcacy, safety, and cost of hemody-
namic support devices ( 3,4). Despite these ﬁndings,
these devices can provide hemodynamic support inselect patients during co mplex PCI with multivessel
disease, left main disease, or disease of the last patentconduit and severe left ventricular dysfunction orcardiogenic shock ( 5-9).
11. PHARMACOTHERAPY IN PATIENTS
UNDERGOING PCI
11.1. Aspirin and Oral P2Y12 Inhibitors in Patients Undergoing
PCI
Recommendations for Aspirin and Oral P2Y1 2 Inhibitors in Patients Undergoing PCI
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplement 32 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-R1. In patients undergoing PCI, a loading dose of aspiri n, followed by daily dosing, is recommended to reduce
ischemic events ( 1-4).*
1 B-R2. In patients with ACS undergoing PCI, a loading dos e of P2Y12 inhibitor, followed by daily dosing, is
recommended to reduce ischemic events ( 5-15 ).
1 C-LD3. In patients with SIHD undergoing PCI, a loading dose of clopidogrel, followed by daily dosing, is rec-
ommended to reduce ischemic events ( 8,12,15-19 ).
1 C-LD4. In patients undergoing PCI within 24 hours after ﬁbrinolytic therapy, a loading dose of 300 mg of clo-
pidogrel, followed by daily dosing, is recommended to reduce ischemic events ( 5).JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee67

Synopsis
DAPT with aspirin and oral P2Y12 inhibitors remains
the cornerstone of therapy for the prevention of throm-botic complications with PCI. In the early days of PCI,a s p i r i nw a sf o u n dt ob ee f f e c t i v ea td e c r e a s i n gc o r o n a r ythrombosis with balloon angioplasty ( 1), and since that
time, aspirin has remained a key agent for patients withchronic vascular disease ( 2-4). The contemporary oral
P2Y12 inhibitors used in PCI include clopidogrel, tica-
grelor, and prasugrel. Pati ents should be treated with a
loading dose of these agents, either before PCI or other-w i s ea tt h et i m eo fP C I( Table 9 ). Clopidogrel is the least
potent agent, requiring longe r time to platelet inhibition
after a loading dose. In patients with stable angina, thereis no compelling evidence to support routine pretreat-ment with a P2Y12 inhibitor before coronary angiographywhen the coronary anatomy is not known ( 22). This is
especially important because the need for CABG still oc-
curs in a nonnegligible proportion of patients referred forangiography, and pretreatment can result in post-ponement of surgery ( 18). The duration of treatment with
DAPT is discussed in Section 14 .
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Aspirin is protective in most types of patients with an
increased risk of occlusive vascular events, including
those with an AMI or ischemic stroke, unstable or sta-ble angina, and previous MI ( 2,3). Aspirin reduces the
frequency of ischemic complications after PCI andshould be given in the periprocedural period ( 1,23).
Although the minimum effective dose of aspirin in thesetting of PCI has not been established, non –enteric-
coated aspirin (325 mg) is commonly administered
before PCI in those patients who were not previously
on aspirin ( 1,24). Observational data and retrospective
analyses of RCTs have demonstrated that a lower doseof chronic daily aspirin ( <100 mg) after PCI results in
the best combination of safety and ef ﬁcacy ( 24-26 ). On
the basis of an analysis of aspirin dosing and outcomesi nt h eP L A T O( T r i a lt oA s s e s sT h eS t u d yo fP l a t e l e t
Inhibition and Patient Outcomes) study, a low dose of
aspirin ( <100 mg) should be used in patients treated
with ticagrelor. There are data to suggest that in thetreatment of ACS, a chewable aspirin formulation maybe preferable to solid tablet aspirin ( 27).
2. P2Y12 inhibitors are essential for treating patients un-
dergoing PCI. Their use was ﬁrst evaluated in studies
exploring the optimal antithrombotic regimens after
coronary stent implantation. In these earlier studies,
ticlopidine was found to be superior to aspirin alone orthe combination of aspirin and anticoagulant therapy(10,11,13) in reducing ischemic events after coronary
stent implantation. Because of unacceptable side ef-fects of ticlopidine, clopidogrel was later used in placeof ticlopidine, with clinical trials demonstrating similarefﬁcacy but lower rates of drug discontinuation
attributable to noncardiac events ( 16). With clopidog-
rel, the introduction of pra sugrel and ticagrelor sup-
p o r t e dt h eu s eo fam o r ep o t e n tP 2 Y 1 2i n h i b i t o ra g e n tfor PCI in ACS ( 6,14). A loading dose of a P2Y12 agent
should be given to minimize the time to platelet inhi-bition. There are con ﬂicting data on the bene ﬁts of
pretreatment with a P2Y12 inhibitor before the anat-
omy is known, particularly in patients with NSTE-ACS
(7,17,28-31 ). In contemporary times, with most pa-
tients with ACS undergoing early angiography, astrategy of loading with a P2Y12 inhibitor after theanatomy is known appears to offer similar bene ﬁtt o
preloading ( 31).
3. The CREDO (Clopidogrel for the Reduction of Events
During Observation) trial ( 18) demonstrated a reduc-
tion in ischemic events, including the risk of death, MI,
or stroke, with a loading dose of clopidogrel and
treatment up to 9 months after elective PCI. There wasa trend toward a lower event rate when preloadingwith a 300-mg clopidogrel dose was given >3h o u r s
before PCI. A 600-mg loading dose of clopidogrel isassociated with a shorter time to platelet inhibition and2a B-R5. In patients with ACS undergoing PCI, it is reasona ble to use ticagrelor or pr asugrel in preference to
clopidogrel to reduce ischemic events, including stent thrombosis ( 6,14,20).
2b B-R6. In patients <75 years of age undergoing PCI within 24 hours after ﬁbrinolytic therapy, ticagrelor may be a
reasonable alternative to clopidogrel to reduce ischemic events ( 21).
3: Harm B-R7. In patients undergoing PCI who have a history of stro ke or transient ischemic attack, prasugrel should not
be administered ( 6).
*Contraindications to ticagrelor: previous intracranial hemorrhage or ongoing bleeding. Contraindications to prasugrel: previous intracrania l hemorrhage, previous ischemic stroke or transient
ischemic attack, or ongoing bleeding. Prasugrel should be used with caution at a lower dose in patients $75 years of age or with a body weight <60 kg.(Continued)Lawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e68

therefore is the preferred dose. Ticagrelor and prasu-
grel have not been studied fo r long-term clinical out-
comes in patients with SIHD undergoing PCI.
4. Patients with STEMI who were treated with ﬁbrinolytic
therapy and referred for PCI are at increased bleedingand ischemic risk. Clopidogrel is the only P2Y12 in-hibitor agent studied in patients immediately after theadministration of ﬁbrinolytic therapy. In the CLARITY
(Clopidogrel as Adjunctive Reperfusion Therapy) trial,clopidogrel pretreatment in conjunction with ﬁbrino-
lytic therapy resulted in a 46% reduction in the rate of
cardiovascular death or recurrent MI or stroke at 30
days among patients referred for PCI ( 5). Major and
minor bleeding was similar between the groups. In thisstudy, patients randomized to clopidogrel wereadministered a 300-mg load during or immediatelyafter ﬁbrinolytic therapy, followed by 75 mg daily ( 5).
In contemporary times, the loading dose of clopidogrelfor patients undergoing PCI after ﬁbrinolytic therapy
should be individualized. A larger loading dose of 600
mg may be used for most patients, whereas the lower300-mg loading dose is generally reserved for olderpatients or those at higher risk of bleeding.
5. TRITON-TIMI-38 (Trial to Assess Improvement in
Therapeutic Outcomes by Optimizing Platelet Inhibi-tion with Prasugrel –Thrombolysis in Myocardial
Infarction) ( 6)a n dP L A T O( 14)d e m o n s t r a t e dt h a t
treatment with prasugrel (TRITON-TIMI-38) and tica-
grelor (PLATO), compared with clopidogrel, reducedthe rate of the composite endpoint of death fromvascular causes, MI, or stroke. These agents were also
associated with a lower rate of stent thrombosis. In theTRITON-TIMI 38 trial, non-CABG major bleeding was
signi ﬁcantly higher with prasugrel ( 6). In PLATO,
although there were no signi ﬁcant differences in the
rates of study-de ﬁned bleeding events with ticagrelor,
non-CABG major bleeding was signi ﬁcantly higher
among patients treated with ticagrelor ( 14)t h a na m o n g
patients treated with clopidogrel ( 14). Because of the
increased bleeding risk, these more potent agentsshould be used with caution in older patients. One
study suggested that clopidogrel may be a reasonable
alternative for older patients with ACS undergoing PCI,with similar rates of ischemic events and less bleeding(32). The open-labeled design of this trial and the high
rate of crossover limit the generalization of the studyresults. Further studies are needed to determine theideal P2Y12 inhibitor for use in older patients with ACSundergoing PCI.
6. In patients with ﬁbrinolytic-treated STEMI, ticagrelor
is associated with a greater in hibition of platelet reac-
tivity than that seen with clopidogrel ( 33). In PLATO,
patients were excluded from enrollment if they weretreated with ﬁbrinolytic therapy within 24 hours of
enrollment. Therefore, alth ough PLATO supported the
use of ticagrelor over clopidogrel in patients withSTEMI treated with ﬁbrinolytic therapy, there were
limited data on the safety of ticagrelor when given
early after ﬁbrinolytic therapy. The TREAT (Ticagrelor
in Patients With ST Elevation Myocardial InfarctionTABLE 9 Oral and Parenteral Antiplatelet Agents for Patients Undergoing PCI
Drug Loading Dose Maintenance Dose
Oral antiplatelet agents
Aspirin Loading dose of 162-325 mg orally ( 11)
Aspirin may be chewed to achieve faster actionMaintenance dose of 75-100 mg orally daily ( 24,25)
Clopidogrel Loading dose of 600 mg orally ( 19)
A lower loading dose of 300 mg should be considered in patients
after ﬁbrinolytic therapy ( 5)Maintenance dose of 75 mg orally daily ( 34)
Prasugrel Loading dose of 60 mg orally ( 20) Maintenance dose of 10 mg orally daily ( 20)
In patients with body weight <60 kg, a maintenance dose of 5 mg orally
daily is recommended ( 35)
In patients $75 years of age, a dose of 5 mg orally daily can be used if
deemed necessary ( 35)
Ticagrelor Loading dose of 180 mg orally ( 14)
Ticagrelor may be chewed to achieve faster actionMaintenance dose of 90 mg orally twice a day ( 14)
Intravenous antiplatelet agents
Abciximab (GPI) * Bolus of 0.25 mg/kg ( 36) Maintenance of 0.125 mg/kg/min infusion (maximum 10 g/min) for 12 h.
(36)
Eptiﬁbatide (GPI) Double bolus of 180 mg/kg (given at a 10-min interval) ( 37) Maintenance infusion of 2.0 mg/kg/min for up to 18 h ( 37)
Tiroﬁban (GPI) Bolus of 25 mg/kg over 3 min ( 38) Maintenance infusion of 0.15 mg/kg/min for up to 18 h ( 38)
Cangrelor Bolus of 30 mg/kg ( 39) Maintenance infusion 4 mg/kg/min for at least 2 h or duration of the
procedure, whichever is longer ( 39)
*Abciximab may not be readily available to clinicians in the United States.
GPI indicates glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitor; and PCI, percutaneous coronary intervention.JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee69

Treated With Pharmacological Thrombolysis) trial was
designed to examine the safety of ticagrelor in patientstreated with ﬁbrinolytic therapy for STEMI ( 21). In this
study, ticagrelor was found to be noninferior to clopi-
dogrel in rates of TIMI major bleeding, fatal bleeding,
and intracranial bleeding ( 21).
7. A more detailed analysis of the TRITON study that was
designed to evaluate net clinical bene ﬁt (MACE events
plus bleeding) with prasugrel demonstrated no netbene ﬁt of prasugrel compared with clopidogrel for
patients with low body weight ( <60 kg) or those $75years of age and found net harm with prasugrel for
patients with previous transient ischemic attack orcerebrovascular accident ( 6). For this reason, prasugrel
is contraindicated in patients with a history of tran-sient ischemic attack or stroke. Caution is advised in
the use of prasugrel in patients weighing <60 kg or in
patients $75 years of age.
11.2. Intravenous P2Y12 Inhibitors in Patients Undergoing PCI
Recommendation for Intravenous P2Y12 Inhibitors in Patients Undergoing PCI
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized in Online Data Supplement 33 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
2b B-R1. In patients undergoing PCI who are P2Y12 inhibito r naïve, intravenous cangrelor may be reasonable to
reduce periprocedural ischemic events ( 1-3).
Synopsis
Cangrelor is a potent, direct, reversible, short-acting
intravenous P2Y12 inhibitor with rapid onset of plateletinhibition and restoration of platelet function within 1hour of discontinuation. Cangrelor thus provides rapid,
predictable, and profound inhibition of platelets. It can be
efﬁcacious in preventing stent thrombosis and may be
considered in patients who have not been pretreated witha P2Y12 inhibitor, in patients whose absorption of oralmedications may be inhibited, or in patients who are un-able to take oral medications. Cangrelor has been inves-tigated within the CHAMPION (Cangrelor versus StandardTherapy to Achieve Optimal Management of Platelet In-
hibition) program and compared with a loading dose of
clopidogrel given at the time of PCI in 3 large-scale clinicaltrials ( 1,2,4). There are no studies comparing cangrelor
with a loading dose of ticagrelor or prasugrel given at thetime of PCI.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supporting Text
1. The CHAMPION PLATFORM and the CHAMPION PCI
trials did not show a reduction in the primary outcome(i.e., death, MI, or ischemia-driven revascularization at
48 hours) with cangrelo r. However, in CHAMPION
PLATFORM, cangrelor resulted in lower rates of theprespeci ﬁed secondary outcomes of stent thrombosis
and death ( 1). In the CHAMPION PHOENIX trial, the
primary endpoint, which included death, MI, ischemia-
driven revascularization, or stent thrombosis, wassigni ﬁcantly reduced with cangrelor ( 2). This was driven
mainly by a reduction in periprocedural MI and intra-procedural stent thrombosis. A pooled patient-levelmeta-analysis of the CHAMPION trials supported theseﬁndings, demonstrating a lower rate of the composite
endpoint of death, MI, ischemia-driven revasculariza-
tion, or stent thrombosis at 48 hours with cangrelor
than with clopidogrel ( 3). Additionally, cangrelor was
associated with a 41% reduction in stent thrombosis.Although major bleeding w as similar between the
groups, minor bleeding was more frequent in the can-grelor group ( 3).
11.3. Intravenous Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa Inhibitors in Patients
Undergoing PCI
Recommendations for Intravenous Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa Inhibitors in Pa tients Undergoing PCI
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplement 34 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
2a C-LD1. In patients with ACS undergoing PCI with large thrombus burden, no-re ﬂow, or slow ﬂow, intravenous
glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitor agents are re asonable to improve procedural success ( 1,2).
3: No Bene ﬁt B-R2. In patients with SIHD undergoing PCI, the routine us e of an intravenous glycop rotein IIb/IIIa inhibitor
agent is not recommended ( 3-5).Lawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e70

Synopsis
Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor inhibitors are direct-
acting antiplatelet agents targeting the glycoprotein IIb/IIIa platelet receptor. Many of the trials of glycoproteinIIb/IIIa inhibitors in the setting of ACS were conducted in
an era before the use of potent P2Y12 inhibitors or before
routine stenting ( 2,6). Additionally, in the earlier trials,
the time from presentation to coronary angiography waso f t e np r o l o n g e d .I nt h ec o ntemporary era of shorter
revascularization times and use of potent DAPT, thebene ﬁt of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa re ceptor inhibitor agents is
diminished ( 2,7).
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supporting Text
1. In trials of patients with ACS, glycoprotein IIb/IIIa re-
ceptor inhibitors have not been associated withimproved clinical outcomes and may increase bleedingcomplications ( 7,8). Because the addition of glycopro-
tein IIb/IIIa receptor inhibitors can decrease thrombusburden by further inhibiting platelet aggregation ( 9),
the use of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor inhibitors in
the era of more potent antiplatelet agents is generally
reserved for patients with a large thrombus burden orno-re ﬂow or slow ﬂow that is believed to be attribut-
able to distal embolization of thrombus.2. In patients with SIHD who are undergoing PCI, the use
of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa rece ptor inhibitors in addition
to a clopidogrel load does not reduce ischemic events(3,4). Patients enrolled in the ISAR-REACT (iNtra-
coronary Stenting and Antithrombotic Regimen: Rapid
Early Action for Coronary Treatment) trial who were
randomized to pretreatment with abciximab and a 600-mg loading dose of clopidogrel had outcomes similar tothose of patients receiving clopidogrel alone ( 3). Major
bleeding was not signi ﬁcantly different between the 2
groups, although the rate of severe thrombocytopeniawas signi ﬁcantly higher in the abciximab group ( 3). A
subgroup analysis of the ESPRIT (Enhance Suppression
of the Platelet IIB/IIIA receptor with Integrilin Therapy)
trial showed no bene ﬁt in the primary endpoint of
death, MI, urgent target-vess el revascularization, and
thrombotic bailout with glyco protein IIb/IIIa inhibitor
therapy with epti ﬁbatide at 48 hours in the group of
patients undergoing PCI for stable angina ( 5). Six-
m o n t hr a t e so fd e a t ho rM Iw e r ea l s on o ts i g n i ﬁcantly
different in this subgroup of patients ( 4).
11.4. Heparin, Low-Molecular-Weight Heparin, and Bivalirudin
in Patients Undergoing PCI
Recommendations for Heparin, Low-Molecular-Weight H eparin, and Bivalirudin i n Patients Undergoing PCI
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplement 35 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 C-EO1. In patients undergoing PCI, administration of intr avenous unfractionated heparin (UFH) is useful to
reduce ischemic events.
1 C-LD2. In patients with heparin-induced t hrombocytopenia undergoing PCI, bivalirudin or argatroban should be
used to replace UFH to avoid thrombotic complications ( 1,2).
2b A3. In patients undergoing PCI, bivalirudin may be a reasonable alternative to UFH to reduce bleeding ( 3-12 ).
2b B-R4. In patients treated with upstream subcutaneous enoxaparin for unstable angina or NSTE-ACS, the use of
intravenous enoxaparin may be considered at the time of PCI to reduce ischemic events ( 13-17 ).
3: Harm B-R5. In patients on therapeutic subcutaneous enoxapar in, in whom the last dose was administered within 12
hours of PCI, UFH should not be used for PCI and may increase bleeding ( 14,18,19).
Synopsis
Antithrombotic therapy is a mainstay of treatment in
patients undergoing PCI. Currently, there are 3 antith-
rombotic agents that have been studied in PCI. These are
UFH, bivalirudin, and enoxa parin. Fondaparinux is no
longer recommended as the only anticoagulant in PCIbecause of a higher incidence of guiding-catheter throm-bosis ( 20,21). Consideration of the patient ’sc l i n i c a lp r e -
sentation (e.g., stable disea se, NSTE-ACS, or STEMI) andbleeding risk pro ﬁle (22)m a yi n ﬂuence selection of the
optimal anticoagulant type. Suggested dosing regimens ofparenteral agents are shown in Table 10 .
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. As the only anticoagulant available for many years, UFH
has been the standard of care by default and the pri-mary comparator for novel agents in RCTs ( 23). Dosing
recommendations were establ ished from early studiesJACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee71

that demonstrated a relationship between activated
clotting times and ischemic complications ( 23-26 ), but
it is unclear that these analyses translate to the moderncoronary stent era ( 27-31 ). Thus, the exact use of dosing
based on activated clotting times in current practice isuncertain. The routine use of f ull-dose anticoagulation
therapy after PCI is no longer indicated.
2. Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia occurs when the
heparin molecule binds to pl atelet factor 4. Argatroban
and bivalirudin are direct thrombin inhibitors anddo not bind to platelet fac tor 4. Because of their
different mechanism of action, argatroban ( 1)a n d
bivalirudin ( 2) are acceptable alternative anticoagu-
lants for use in patients with heparin-induced
thrombocytopenia.
3. RCTs comparing bivalirudin and heparin have re-
ported no difference in ischemic endpoints; however,less bleeding was reported with bivalirudin(3-7,9,29,32-37 ). Although the reduction in bleeding
complications with the use of bivalirudin was seen inmost trials, in real-world practice, this bene ﬁtm a yb e
less pronounced with routine use of radial artery
intervention and low rates of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa
inhibitor use. Meta-analyses of clinical trial datasupport these ﬁndings, highlighting that the magni-
tude of the lower bleeding risk with bivalirudin invarious trials depended on variable inclusion of aglycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitor ( 10,11). The VALIDATE-
SWEDEHEART (Bivalirudin vs Heparin in NSTEMIand STEMI in Patients on Modern Antiplatelet Ther-
a p yi nS W E D E H E A R T )s t u d y( 38) examined a pro-
longed bivalirudin infusion versus UFH. Patients weretreated with the more potent P2Y12 inhibitors, 90%h a dr a d i a la r t e r ya c c e s s ,a n dt h e r ew a sal o wr a t eo fglycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitor use. Compared withUFH, bivalirudin was not associated with improved
rates of MACE, major bleeding, or stent thrombosis at6m o n t h s .
4. Enoxaparin is considered a safe alternative to UFH
(15,16). In the SYNERGY (Superior Yield of the New
Strategy of Enoxaparin, Revascularization and Glyco-
protein IIb/IIIa Inhibitors) ( 14)a n dA t o Z( A g g r a s t a tt o
Zocor) ( 13) trials of patients with NSTE-ACS, enox-
aparin was shown to be noninferior to UFH, with nodifference in rates of death, MI, or major bleeding. Inprimary PCI, the ATOLL (Acute STEMI Treated WithPrimary Angioplasty and Intravenous Lovenox or UFHto Lower Ischemic and Bleeding Events) ( 15)t r i a l
compared intravenous enoxaparin and UFH and
showed a reduction in the main secondary endpoint
(composite of death, recurrent ACS, and urgent revas-cularization) in the enoxaparin arm, without morebleeding. These ﬁndings have been supported by a
subsequent large meta-anal ysis that included patients
undergoing PCI for STEMI and NSTE-ACS, whichshowed a reduction in rates of all-cause death andbleeding ( 16). Almost all patients undergoing elective
PCI who are administered enoxaparin (0.5 mg/kg IV)
will have a peak anti-Xa level >0.5 IU/mL ( 31,39).
5. In clinical trials, patients who were given upstream
enoxaparin and then switched to UFH had morecomplications, which are attributed at least in part tostacking both medications at the time of PCI, evenwhen heparin is administere da sl o n ga s1 0h o u r sa f t e r
t h el a s td o s eo fe n o x a p a r i n( 18,19). While these trials
were performed prior to the widespread use of radial
artery access, it is prefera ble to avoid the adminis-
tration of UFH in patients that have received enox-aparin in the previous 1 2 hours to reduce risk of
bleeding.TABLE 10 Anticoagulant Dosing During PCI *
Dosing of Parenteral Anticoagulants During PCI
Drug Patient Has Received Previous Anticoagulant TherapyPatient Has Not Received Previous Anticoagulant
Therapy
UFH nAdditional UFH as needed (e.g., 2000 –5000 U) to achieve an ACT
of 250-300 s *70–100 U/kg initial bolus to achieve target ACT of 250 –
300 s *
Enoxaparin nFor previous treatment with enoxaparin, if the last SC dose was
administered 8 –12 h earlier or if only 1 SC dose of enoxaparin has been
administered,
an IV dose of 0.3 mg/kg of enoxaparin should be given ( 43-45 )
nIf the last SC dose was administered within the previous 8 h, no additional
enoxaparin should be givenn0.5–0.75 mg/kg IV bolus
Bivalirudin nFor patients who have received UFH, repeat ACT
nIf ACT is not in therapeutic range, then give 0.75 mg/kg IV bolus, then
1.75 mg/kg/h IV infusionn0.75 mg/kg bolus, 1.75 mg/kg/h IV infusion
Argatroban n200 mg/kg IV bolus, then 15 mg/kg/min IV infusion n350mg/kg, then 15 mg/kg/min IV infusion
*Target ACTs for UFH dosing shown for HemoTec (GmbH, Switzerland) or I-Stat (Abbott) device. For Hemochron ACT (Werfen) devices, ACT goals are 50 s hig her. In the case of CTO or
ACS, consider higher target ACT. If IV glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor inhibitor is planned, target ACT 200 –250 s ( 26,27,31,40-42 ).
ACS indicates acute coronary syndrome; ACT, activated clotting time; CTO, chronic total occlusion; PCI, percutaneous coronary intervention; and U FH, unfractionated heparin.Lawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e72

12. GENERAL PROCEDURAL ISSUES FOR CABG
12.1. Perioperative Considerations in Patients Undergoing
CABG
Recommendation for Perioperative Considerations in Patients Undergoing CABG
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized in Online Data Supplement 36 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
1 B-NR1. For patients undergoing CABG, establishment of mul tidisciplinary, evidence-based perioperative man-
agement programs is recommended to optimize anal gesia, minimize opioid exposure, prevent compli-
cations and to reduce time to extubation, length of stay, and health care costs ( 1-3).
Synopsis
Previous recommendations wi th regard to perioperative
management assessed the role of certain monitoring mo-
dalities to guide intraoperative and postoperativedecision-making and also emphasized the use of fast-trackcardiac anesthesia, which uses short-acting anestheticagents to improve outcomes after CABG ( 4). More
recently, cardiac surgical se rvice lines have been encour-
aged to expand the scope of these efforts to developmultidisciplinary perioperative programs that incorporate
bundled evidence-based surgi cal, anesthetic, and nursing
interventions, including the targeted use of appropriatemonitoring modalities, to optimize care and improve pa-tient recovery.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supporting Text
1. Fast-track cardiac anesthesia was extensively studied in
the early 2000s and was found to reduce opioid use and
hasten extubation ( 5,6); however, it did not uniformly
reduce complications or length of stay in patients afterCABG ( 7,8). More recently, cardiac surgical service lines
have expanded on fast-track anesthetic agents and
implemented enhanced recovery programs, which use
more extensive phase-speci ﬁcp e r i o p e r a t i v ei n -
terventions. Such programs have been shown to pre-vent early postoperative complications, minimizeexposure to opioid-based analgesia, and reduce time toe x t u b a t i o n ,t i m ei nt h ei n t e n s i v ec a r eu n i t ,a n dh o s p i t a llength of stay after CABG ( 1-3). Components of such
programs may include liberation of “nothing by mouth ”
status, bundled surgical site infection prevention,
multimodal nonopioid analgesics, protocolized short-acting anesthetics, targeted -organ perfusion strategies,
and early postoperative ambulation. Assessment ofenhanced recovery programs has been generally limitedto moderate-sized observational studies, and additionalresearch is required to determine the necessary featuresand implementation strategies. Providers may consider
the use of speci ﬁc anesthetic and monitoring modalities
outlined in Table 11 .
TABLE 11 Perioperative Anesthetic and Monitoring Considerations for CABG
Anesthetic considerations
Perioperative analgesia Nonopioid medications (e.g., acetaminophen, ketamine, dexmedetomidine) and/or regional techniques (e.g., truncal ner ve blocks),
particularly as part of a multimodal analgesic approach, have been shown to reduce perioperative opioid use in cardiac surgery ( 1-
16).
Maintenance anesthesia Although volatile (versus intravenous) anesthesia may facilitate earlier extubation ( 2,6-8,12,14), recent evidence suggests that the
choice of maintenance anesthetic likely does not impact mortality rate after cardiac surgery ( 17-21 ).
Mechanical ventilation An intraoperative lung-protective ventilation strategy (i.e., tidal volume of 6 –8 mL/kg predicted body weight þpositive end-
expiratory pressure) has been shown to improve pulmonary mechanics and reduce postoperative pulmonary complications ( 21-
25).
Goal-directed therapy Goal-directed therapy, which creates protocols for the use of ﬂuids and vasopressors to target speci ﬁc hemodynamic goals, has
yielded inconsistent results and requires additional investigation to determine its use in cardiac surgery ( 26,27).
TEECABG þvalve procedures Intraoperative TEE aids in the real-time assessment of heart valve function and pathology in those undergoing combination CABG
and valve surgery ( 28-30 ).
Isolated CABG procedures The use of intraoperative TEE in isolated CABG is less established but has been shown to aid in surgical and anesthetic decisi on-
making as a tool for real-time assessment of hemodynamic status, regional wall motion, ventricular function, valve anatomy, and
diastolic function ( 28-35 ).
Continued on the next pageJACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee73

12.2. Bypass Conduits in Patients Undergoing CABG
Synopsis
In the choice of conduits for CABG, both clinical and
technical factors (e.g., life expectancy, presence of dia-betes, presence of CKD, degree of target stenosis) are
considered ( Table 12 ). Decades of data have supported the
use of the LIMA to graft the LAD to prolong survival.These data are from observational studies and, for themost part, were derived before the introduction of current
optimal medical therapy. Th e LIMA is preferable unless
speci ﬁc contraindications are present. The right IMA can
be used to graft the LAD if the LIMA is unusable, or ther i g h tI M Ac a nb eu s e di nc o n j u n c t i o nw i t ht h eL I M A( B I M A
grafting). Several randomized trials and meta-analyses
have demonstrated better mid- and long-term patencyrates for the radial artery than for the saphenous vein. Apooled analysis of 6 randomized trials has shownimproved clinical outcomes at 10 years ’follow-up ( 13).
The right IMA is biologically equivalent to the LIMA,
and BIMA grafting has shown a survival advantagecompared with CABG with a single IMA in observational
studies. The extensive use of arterial conduits ( >2)
instead of SVGs for multivessel CABG may provide anadditional late mortality bene ﬁtc o m p a r e dw i t hC A B G
with 2 arterial grafts.Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Several randomized trials and meta-analyses have re-
ported better mid- and long-term patency rates for theradial artery than fo r the saphenous vein ( 2,14), while
observational studies and meta-analyses have sug-gested a survival bene ﬁt when the radial artery is used
instead of the saphenous vein for CABG ( 3). A pooled
analysis of 6 randomized trials showed improved clin-
ical outcome with regard to adverse cardiac events at 5and 10 years after surgery when the radial artery wasused instead of the saphenou s vein to revascularize the
most important non-LAD ar tery coronary target ( 1,13).
Patients <7 5y e a r so fa g e ,w o m e n ,a n dp a t i e n t sw i t h
preserved renal function seem to bene ﬁtt h em o s tf r o m
t h eu s eo ft h er a d i a la r t e r y .T h ee v i d e n c ei sb a s e d
largely on the use of the radial artery constructed as an
aortocoronary graft. In observational studies, compos-ite radial artery grafts have been found to be morevulnerable to the effect of chronic native competitiveﬂow, but the evidence is limited ( 15).
2. Data supporting the LIMA versus an SVG for grafting of
the LAD are derived almost exclusively from observa-tional studies reported 25 to 35 years ago ( 5-7). In theTABLE 11 Continued
Pulmonary artery catheters
High-risk surgery Highly selective use of pulmonary artery catheters for high-risk patients (i.e., older, with congestive heart failure, pulmonar y
hypertension, or previous multiple valve procedures) may be safe and may potentially aid in the surveillance and treatment of
hemodynamic instability ( 36-38 ).
Low-risk surgery The use of pulmonary artery catheters in low-risk or clinically stable patients is discouraged because the practice is associated w ith
increased interventions that incur greater health care expense without associated improvement in morbidity or mortality rates
(38-40 ).
CNS monitoringCerebral oxygen saturation Intraoperative monitoring of cerebral oxygen saturation (i.e., near-infrared spectroscopy) to detect cerebral hypop erfusion has been
shown to guide anesthetic decision-making and may prevent postoperative neurocognitive dysfunction ( 41-47 ).
Processed electroencephalogram Routine use of intraoperative monitoring of processed electroencephalogram (i.e., bispectral index) has yielde d inconsistent results
with respect to the prevention of recall, determination of depth of anesthesia, or improvement in rate of recovery after cardiac
surgery ( 48-51 ).
CABG indicates coronary artery bypass graft; CNS, central nervous system; and TEE, transesophageal echocardiography.
Recommendations for Bypass Condu its in Patients Undergoing CABG
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplement 37 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-R1. In patients undergoing isolated CABG, the use o f a radial artery is recommended in preference to a
saphenous vein conduit to graft the second most important, signi ﬁcantly stenosed, non –LAD vessel to
improve long-term cardiac outcomes ( 1-3).
1 B-NR2. In patients undergoing CABG, an IMA, preferably t he left, should be used to bypass the LAD when bypass
of the LAD is indicated to improve surviv al and reduce recurrent ischemic events ( 4-9).
2a B-NR3. In patients undergoing CABG, bilateral IMA (BI MA) grafting by experienced operators can be bene ﬁcial in
appropriate patients to improve long-term cardiac outcomes ( 3,10-12 ).Lawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e74

CASS (Coronary Artery Surgery Study) registry, survival
was improved in patients who received the LIMA-LADcompared with the SVG group after multivariable
adjustment ( 7). In another series of nearly 6000 pa-
tients undergoing CABG, LIMA grafting reduceddeaths, recurrent infarction , rehospitalization for car-
diac events, and repeat revascularization ( 6). In this
study, postoperative angiography revealed substan-tially higher LIMA patency. A single small RCT alsofound improved cardiac event –free survival at 10 years
in the LIMA arm ( 4,5).
3. The bene ﬁt of BIMA in CABG is supported by observa-
tional studies and in several meta-analyses ( 3,10,11,16).
A meta-analysis of 38 studies, including 174,205 pa-tients, noted a decreased mo rtality rate at 7.25 years
with BIMA use ( 16). However, a single large RCT
compared BIMA with single IMA in 3102 patients andreported no difference in 10-year all-cause mortalityrate or in the composite of death, MI, or stroke ( 12).
However, a high rate of crossover was noted (14% fromBIMA to single IMA, and 22% of the patients with a
single IMA received a radial artery). An as-treated
analysis reported improved survival in patients whoreceived multiple arterial grafts ( 12). Increasing BIMA
volume was associated with protocol adherence, whichsuggests the importance o fs u r g i c a le x p e r t i s e( 12). Low
institutional BIMA volume has also been associatedwith a higher operative mortality rate with BIMAgrafting ( 17). Observational studies and 2 meta-analyses
support the use of $3 arterial grafts, including total
arterial revascularization ( 18,19). The increased risk of
sternal infection with BIMA grafting should be consid-ered during preoperative planning ( 17).
12.3. CABG in Patients Undergoing Other Cardiac SurgeryTABLE 12 Best Practices for the Use of Bypass Conduits in CABG
-Objectively assess palmar arch completeness and ulnar compensation before harvesting the radial artery. Use the arm with the best ulnar compensatio n for radial
artery harvesting.
-Use radial artery grafts to target vessels with subocclusive stenoses.
-Avoid the use of the radial artery after transradial catheterization.
-Avoid the use of the radial artery in patients with chronic kidney disease and a high likelihood of rapid progression to hemodialysis.
-Use oral calcium channel blockers for the ﬁrst postoperative year after radial artery grafting.
-Avoid bilateral percutaneous or surgical radial artery procedures in patients with coronary artery disease to preserve the artery for future use.
-Harvest the internal mammary artery using the skeletonization technique to reduce the risk of sternal wound complications.
-Use an endoscopic saphenous vein harvest technique in patients at risk of wound complications.
-Use a no-touch saphenous vein harvest technique in patients at low risk of wound complications.
-Use the skeletonized right gastroepiploic artery to graft right coronary artery target vessels with subocclusive stenosis if the operator is experi enced with the use of
the artery.
CABG indicates coronary artery bypass graft.
Recommendations for CABG in Patients Undergoing Other Cardiac Surgery
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplement 38 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 C-LD1. In patients undergoing valve surgery, aortic s urgery, or other cardiac operations who have signi ﬁcant
CAD, CABG is recommended with a goa l of reducing ischemic events ( 1-11).
2b C-LD2. In patients undergoing valve surgery, aortic surge ry, or other cardiac operations who have intermediate
CAD, CABG may be reasonable with a goal of reducing ischemic events ( 5,7,10,12).
Synopsis
The decision to add CABG to another planned cardiac
surgery in patients with signi ﬁcant CAD is multifactorial.
Considerations include but are not limited to comorbid-ities, technical feasibility of CABG, extent of thejeopardized myocardium, av ailability of conduit, left
ventricular ejection fraction, and the additional timeneeded to construct the coronary bypass while on car-diopulmonary bypass. A multidisciplinary discussion witha Heart Team can help weigh the risks and bene ﬁts ofJACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee75

adding CABG to the index cardiac operation. Age does not
appear to be a prohibitive risk factor for the addition ofCABG to other cardiac surgery in patients between theages of 75 and 84 years ( 1,2,4), but risk increases in
patients $85 years of age ( 12) .T h ea v a i l a b l ee v i d e n c e
supporting CABG at the time of cardiac surgery performed
for another primary indication (i.e., valve, aortic, or othercardiac surgery) is limited and complicated because manystudies include patients with CAD de ﬁned as at least 1
vessel with stenosis $50%, thus including both interme-
diate and signi ﬁcant CAD. The knowledge that incomplete
revascularization is associated with reduced long-termsurvival rates after surger yc o m p a r e dw i t hp a t i e n t sw h o
receive complete revascularization may inform decisions
about adding CABG to other cardiac surgery ( 5,10). Addi-
tionally, it has become standard practice to bypass sig-niﬁcant coronary artery stenoses in patients undergoing
other cardiac surgery.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supporting Text
1. Several observational studies and meta-analyses
compared clinical outcomes in patients undergoing
aortic valve replacement (AVR) with and without sig-niﬁcant CAD ( $70% stenosis of any major epicardial
coronary vessel, including side branches, or $50%
stenosis of the left main) ( 6-9,12). Patients who un-
derwent AVR with concomitant CABG demonstratedlong-term survival and health-related quality of lifesimilar to that of patients without CAD. Concomitant
CABG may increase the risk of perioperative morbiditya n dm o r t a l i t yc o m p a r e dw i t hi s o l a t e dA V R( 2-4). In
patients with signi ﬁcant CAD who underwent isolated
AVR or AVR plus CABG, concomitant CABG was asso-ciated with a reduced late all-cause mortality rate(hazard ratio, 0.62; 95% CI, 0.49 –0.79; p <0.001) ( 10). A
large study of 6151 patients found that patients with
extensive CAD ( >50% left main stenosis or $3d i s e a s e d
vessels) undergoing AVR with CABG had more comor-bidities and had more perioperative morbidity, but notmortality, than did patients with less extensive CADundergoing AVR with CABG ( 12). A large study that
propensity-matched patients undergoing AVR to pa-tients undergoing AVR with CABG demonstrated no
differences in morbidity or mortality between groups,
which suggests that survival is dominated largely bypatient comorbidities ( 7). Studies focusing on CABG as
a secondary procedure durin g other cardiac operations,
including mitral valve, tricuspid valve, aortic, andpericardial surgery, are limited.
2. Limited data are available comparing CABG for inter-
mediate CAD (stenosis, 40% –69%) in patients under-
going other cardiac surgery. Observational studies
comparing patients undergoing AVR with and withoutCABG for intermediate CAD suggest that the addition ofCABG may reduce ischemic events ( 5,7,10,12). Patients
with intermediate CAD may bene
ﬁt from physiological
testing with iFR or FFR to guide decision-making.
12.4. Use of Epiaortic Ultrasound in Patients Undergoing CABG
Recommendation for Use of Epiaortic Ultrasound in Patients Undergoing CABG
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized in Online Data Supplement 39 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
2a B-NR1. In patients undergoing CABG, the routine use of epiaortic ultrasound scanning can be useful to evaluate
the presence, location, and severity of plaque in th e ascending aorta to reduce the incidence of athe-
roembolic complications ( 1-10 ).
Synopsis
Atherosclerotic disease of the aorta is common in pa-
tients who undergo CABG surgery, with a reported prev-
alence that varies between 19% and 90%, depending on
the patient population and modality of examination ( 2,11-
16). There has been a clear association between aortic
atherosclerosis and stroke ( 17), especially in patients un-
dergoing CABG ( 11,12,18-21 ). Epiaortic ultrasound has been
demonstrated to be far superior to either surgical digitalpalpation or transesophageal echocardiography fordeﬁning the presence and extent of disease and has come
to be recognized as the “gold standard ”for the detectionof aortic atherosclerosis ( 13-15 ,22-24 ). There has been
considerable variability in the extent to which epiaorticultrasound has changed operative strategy, varying from
4% to 22% ( 1,2,6,9,16).
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supporting Text
1. The ability of routine epiaortic ultrasound to decrease
stroke risk in patients unde rgoing CABG is unclear. One
small prospective trial failed to meet a prespeci ﬁed 50%
difference in neurocognitive testing ( 4). Although it is
not uniformly reported ( 3), several large retrospective
and registry studies ( 1,2,6,7,9,10), as well as mostLawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e76

single-center prospective studies, found an association
with reduced risk of stroke ( 3-5,8). Procedural risk,
extra time required, and cost are minimal. The use ofepiaortic ultrasound to evaluate the presence, location,and severity of atherosclerotic plaque in the ascending
aorta allows for the intra operative adjustment ofoperative technique to avoid atheroembolic
complications.
12.5. Use of Cardiopulmonary Bypass in Patients Undergoing
CABG
Recommendations for Use of Cardiopulmo nary Bypass in Patients Undergoing CABG
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplement 40 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
2a B-R1. In patients with signi ﬁcant calci ﬁcation of the aorta, the use of techniques to avoid aortic manipulation
(off-pump techniques or beating heart) is reasonabl et od e c r e a s et h ei n c i d e n c eo fp e r i o p e r a t i v es t r o k e
when performed by experienced surgeons ( 1,2).
2b B-R2. In patients with signi ﬁcant pulmonary disease, off-pump surgery may be reasonable to reduce periop-
erative risk when performed by experienced surgeons ( 2-6).
Synopsis
When the operative strategy for CABG for a patient is
being planned, it may be determined that the risks ofaortic manipulation preclude the safe use of a cross-clampor cannulation of the ascending aorta, and signi ﬁcant
pulmonary disease may increase risk of cardiopulmonarybypass. In such cases, the risks and bene ﬁts of alternative
operative strategies (off-pump or beating heart) areconsidered, along with surgeon experience with such
strategies. Excellent surgical results can be achieved by
surgeons experienced in off-pump techniques with eitheron-pump or off-pump CABG ( 2,4-15). The major concerns
with the off-pump approach relate to the technical dif ﬁ-
culty of bypassing corona ry arteries in the circum ﬂex
d i s t r i b u t i o n ,a sw e l la st h es m a l la n di n t r a m y o c a r d i a lsegments. These issues have resulted in a tendency to-ward fewer grafts per patient ( 2,16,17), a potential for
incomplete revascularization ( 2,15), and a concern about
long-term graft patency ( 17-20 ).
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Off-pump CABG was developed to reduce the risks
associated with cardiopulmonary bypass and aorticmanipulation and the associated potential for neuro-logical, renal, and myocardial injury. There arediscrepant ﬁndings between observational and retro-
spective studies and prospective RCTs(6,12,15,16,20,21). The use of an off-pump approach
with minimized aortic manipulation may result in a
decreased incidence of perioperative stroke in thepresence of a calci ﬁed ascending aorta ( 1,2). Reported
short-term bene ﬁts of decreased blood product use and
length of stay may be operator driven rather than pro-cedure driven and may be achievable with eitherapproach ( 22). Reduced perioperative renal injury may
not be sustained on longer follow-up ( 23). To the extent
that the off-pump technique p ermits less manipulation
of the aorta, there appears to be a decreased incidenceof perioperative stroke that is dif ﬁcult to discern from
individual studies ( 1,2).
2. Off-pump CABG has been shown to be associated with
earlier extubation, reduced blood transfusion, andreduced duration of mechanical ventilation comparedwith on-pump CABG and may improve outcomes for
patients with increased pulmonary risk, which is
perhaps related to avoidance of the systemic in ﬂam-
matory response attribut able to cardiopulmonary
bypass and its impact on pulmonary function ( 2-6).
13. PHARMACOTHERAPY IN PATIENTS
UNDERGOING CABG
13.1. Insulin Infusion and Other Measures to Reduce Sternal
Wound Infection in Patients Undergoing CABG
Recommendations for Insulin Infusion and Other Measures to R educe Sternal Wound Infection in Patients Undergoing CABG
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplement 41 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-R1. In patients undergoing CABG, an intraoperative conti nuous insulin infusion should be initiated to maintain
serum glucose level <180 mg/dL to reduce sternal wound infection ( 1-3).JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee77

Synopsis
Sternal wound infection has become less common in
CABG surgery, with current rates reported to be <1% (16).
However, the associated risk of death may increaseseveral-fold ( 17), while the associated morbidity and
expense can be considerable ( 7). Management of hyper-
glycemia with perioperative insulin infusion to maintain a
glucose level <1 8 0m g / d L ,b o t hi np a t i e n t sw i t hk n o w n
diabetes and in patients with stress hyperglycemia, hasemerged as an important strategy to prevent infection, aswell as to improve survival and reduce recurrent ischemicevents ( 1-3,18,19). Continuous intravenous insulin infu-
sion after CABG reduces postoperative complications,such as mediastinitis, cardiac arrhythmias, deep sternalwould infections, renal failure, and length of stay ( 3,5,6).
In addition to standard antibiotic prophylaxis, several
other strategies have emerged as best practices to reducethe risk of sternal infection ( Table 13 ).
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Continuous intravenous infusion of insulin is effective
in maintaining blood glucose <180 mg/dL in patients
undergoing CABG with the intent of reducing the risk
of sternal wound infection. Perioperative glucose
management has been found to be effective both inpatients who are recognized to have diabetes and inthose who experience stress hyperglycemia ( 1-3,19).
2. The optimal level of glycemic control needed to
improve outcomes in patients undergoing cardiacsurgery remains controversial. One study evaluatingintensive insulin therapy to target a glucose level of
b e t w e e n1 0 0m g / d La n d1 4 0m g / d Li nt h ei n t e n s i v e
care unit did not demonstra te reduced perioperative
complications after CABG compared with a targetglucose level of between 141 mg/dL and 180 mg/dL ( 4).
An RCT and multiple observational studies havedemonstrated that continuous intravenous insulininfusion is associated with reduced variability inglucose concentration, reduced hospital length of stay,reduced ischemic events, reduced wound complica-
tions, and improved survival compared with subcu-taneous insulin in patients with diabetes who undergoCABG ( 3,5,6,20,21).
3. With an aggressive preventive approach, some centers
report zero incidence of sternal infection ( 14,22).
However, there is no evidence-based preventive
“bundle ”(7,23-25 ). Strong evidence supports the peri-
operative administration of antibiotics ( 9,26), with
general agreement that continuation of prophylacticantibiotics for >48 hours lacks additional bene ﬁt.
Mupirocin has been found to be effective in reducingStaphylococcus aureus infection in patients who are
nasal carriers, and there is no evidence that it isbene ﬁcial for those who are not. Topical vancomycin
paste may have bene
ﬁt(11,14,22), whereas the formerly
ubiquitous use of bone wax is falling into increasingdisfavor ( 12,13,27) .T h eu s eo fB I M A sa sb y p a s sc o n -
duits has generally been associated with an increasedrisk of sternal wound infection ( 28), although there is
considerable center-speci ﬁc evidence that this risk can
be ameliorated by use of the “skeletonized ”technique
(29), which may cause less disruption of sternal
perfusion and lymphatic drainage.
4. An RCT of 400 patients compared intraoperative
intensive treatment (glucose levels 80 –100 mg/dL) or
conventional treatment (insulin given only for aglucose concentration $200 mg/dL) ( 15) and found no
difference between groups in a composite endpoint ofdeath, deep sternal wound infection, prolongedventilation, cardiac arrhythmias, stroke, or renal fail-
ure within 30 days. There was an increased incidence
of death and stroke in the patients who receivedintensive treatment ( 15). In another RCT, 381 patients
without diabetes undergoing isolated CABG were givenintraoperative infusions o f insulin or placebo when
their blood glucose concentrations exceeded 100 mg/dL. Insulin infusion during cardiopulmonary bypasshad no signi ﬁcant effect on the combined incidence of1 B-R2. In patients undergoing CABG, the use of continuous in travenous insulin to achieve and maintain an early
postoperative blood glucose concentration of <180 mg/dL while avoiding hypoglycemia is indicated to
reduce the incidence of adverse events, including deep sternal wound infection ( 3-6).
1 B-NR3. In patients undergoing CABG, a comprehensive app roach to reduce sternal wound infection is recom-
mended ( 7-14 ).
2b B-R4. In patients undergoing CABG, the usefulness of c ontinuous intravenous insulin designed to achieve a
target intraoperative blood glucose concentration <140 mg/dL is uncertain ( 4,15).(Continued)Lawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e78

neurological, neuro-ophthalmologic, or neuro-
behavioral de ﬁcits or neurological death and did not
shorten the length of hospital stay ( 30). Thus, these
data highlight the evidence that extremely tight con-trol of blood glucose after CABG is not associated with
improved outcomes.
13.2. Antiplatelet Therapy in Patients Undergoing CABGTABLE 13 Best Practices to Reduce Sternal Wound I nfection in Patients Undergoing CABG
-Perform nasal swab testing for Staphylococcus aureus (8).
-Apply mupirocin 2% ointment to known nasal carriers of S aureus (8).
-Apply preoperative intranasal mupirocin 2% ointment to those patients whose nasal culture or PCR result is unknown ( 8).
-Redose prophylactic antimicrobials for long procedures ( >2 half-lives of the antibiotic) or in cases of excessive blood loss during CABG ( 10,11,27).
-Measure perioperative HbA 1c(31).
-Treat all distant extrathoracic infections before nonemergency surgical coronary revascularization ( 19).
-Advise smoking cessation before elective CABG surgery ( 7).
-Apply topical antibiotics (vancomycin) to the cut edges of the sternum on opening and before closing in cardiac surgical procedures involving a media n sternotomy
(4,32).
-Use skeletonized harvest of IMA in BIMA grafting ( 16).
-Do not continue prophylactic antibiotics beyond 48 hours ( 9,11).
BIMA indicates bilateral internal mammary artery; CABG, coronary artery bypass graft; HbA 1c, glycated hemoglobin A 1c; IMA, internal mammary artery; and PCR, polymerase chain
reaction.
Recommendations for Antiplatelet Therapy in Patients Undergoing CABG
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplement 42 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-R1. In patients undergoing CABG who are already taking da ily aspirin preoperatively, it is recommended that
they continue taking aspirin until the time of surgery to reduce ischemic events ( 1-7).
1 B-NR2. In patients referred for urgent CABG, clopidogrel an d ticagrelor should be discontinued for at least 24
hours before surgery to reduce major bleeding complications ( 8-11 ).
1 B-NR3. In patients undergoing CABG, dis continuation of short-acting glyc oprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors (epti ﬁbatide
and tiro ﬁban) for 4 hours and abciximab for 12 hours before surgery is recommended to reduce the risk of
bleeding and transfusion ( 12-14 ).
2a B-NR4. In patients undergoing elective CABG who receive P2Y12 receptor inhibitors before surgery, it is
reasonable to discontinue clopidogrel for 5 days, ti cagrelor for 3 days, and prasugrel for 7 days before
CABG to reduce risk of major bleedin g and blood product transfusion ( 8,9,11,15-23 ).
3: No bene ﬁt B-R5. In patients undergoing elective CABG who are not already taking aspirin, the initiation of aspirin
(100 –300 mg daily) in the immedi ate preoperative period ( <24 hours before surgery) is not
recommended ( 24,25).
Synopsis
The use of aspirin and antipl atelet agents in patients
undergoing CABG is discussed with the Heart Team to
determine the optimal treatment for each patient, withcareful consideration of the risk of myocardial ischemia,signi ﬁcant bleeding, reoperation, and transfusion. The
present recommendations are based on the severity of thepatient ’s condition and the associated surgical necessity.
When the various therapies are considered, the urgency ofthe planned surgery should be determined, as outlined in
Table 7 (Section 5.2 )(26,27).
Recommendation-Speci ﬁcS u p p o r t i n gT e x t
1. Most patients who undergo CABG are already taking
aspirin for primary or secondary prevention of newcardiovascular events. Early observational data showedan association between preoperative aspirin adminis-tration and reduced in-hospital mortality rate ( 1,2).JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee79

Although more recent meta-analyses of randomized
and nonrandomized trials have yielded somewhatconﬂicting results, continuation of existing preopera-
tive aspirin is likely associated with a reduction in therisk of MI but not death ( 3-5). Continuation of aspirin
until the time of surgery is associated with an
increased risk of perioperative bleeding and trans-f u s i o n ,a l t h o u g ht h i sd o e sn o ta p p e a rt oi n c r e a s et h elikelihood of surgical reoperation ( 3-7). Patients at risk
of signi ﬁcant bleeding (e.g., r edo operations or un-
derlying bleeding dyscrasias) may warrant individual-ized consideration but are underrepresented in theliterature.
2. The coadministration of a spirin and a P2Y12 receptor
inhibitor (i.e., clopidogrel, ticagrelor, prasugrel) iscommon, particularly in the setting of ACS or recentstent placement. In such patients, the risk of ischemicevents must be weighed against the risks of bleedingwhen decisions are made about the cessation of P2Y12receptor inhibitors before CABG ( 8-11).
3. Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors (i.e., epti ﬁbatide, tir-
oﬁban, abciximab) are sometimes given to patients
who are at high risk of acute ischemic events whilethey are awaiting CABG. The therapeutic half-life foreach glycoprotein IIb/IIIa in hibitor, in addition to a
patient ’s renal function, are considered in the deter-
mination of safe discontinuation before CABG, anddata from observational studies have establishedoptimal cessation periods before CABG for each agent
with reasonable safety pro ﬁles (12-14 ). Abciximab may
not be readily available to clinicians in the UnitedStates.
4. CABG performed <5 days after the discontinuation of
clopidogrel is associated with an increased risk of ma-jor bleeding complications, such as tamponade orreoperation, a ﬁnding that was suggested by early
observational data ( 9,15)a n dc o n ﬁrmed by more recentrandomized and nonrandomized trials ( 10,16-18 ). Early
experience also suggested that preoperative ticagrelorshould be withheld for a similar time frame (5 days)before surgery to reduce bleeding and blood productadministration ( 11,19). However, platelet inhibition
assay results from 1 randomized study ( 20)a n dm o r e
recent data from 2 separate observational trials haverevealed that delaying surgery for 72 hours is likelysufﬁcient ( 8,21). The timing for prasugrel is less
established but results from the TRITON-TIMI-38 trialsuggested that among patients who underwent CABG,prasugrel resulted in a higher rate of major bleedingthan that seen with clopidogrel ( 22). In a subset of
patients in the ACCOAST (A Comparison of Prasugrel at
PCI or Time of Diagnosis of Non –ST-Elevation
Myocardial Infarction) study, early surgery ( <3d a y s
after discontinuation of prasugrel) led to an increasedrisk of bleeding and ischemic complications, whereaslater surgery ( >7d a y s )d i dn o t( 23).
5. Initiation of aspirin therapy in the immediate preop-
erative period ( <24 hours) has been investigated in 2
randomized trials. In the ﬁrst trial ( 24), patients un-
dergoing CABG who received 100 mg of aspirin 1 to 2hours before surgery experienced a composite outcomeof death and thrombotic complications at 30 days andan incidence of major bleeding and cardiac tamponadethat were similar to tho se seen with placebo ( 24). In the
second trial (
25), patients randomized to receive 300
mg of aspirin the night before surgery had increased
episodes of major bleeding ( >750 mL in 24 hours, or
1000 mL overall) and increased transfusion rates, butno signi ﬁcant differences were found in major cardio-
vascular events at early (30 days) or long-term (36months) time points ( 25) compared with placebo.
13.3. Beta Blockers and Amiodarone in Patients Undergoing
CABG
Recommendations for Beta Blockers and Amiodarone in Patients Undergoing CABG
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplement 43 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
2a B-R1. In patients undergoing CABG, who do not have a contra indication to beta blockers, the administration of
beta blockers before surgery can be bene ﬁcial to reduce the incidence of postoperative atrial ﬁbrillation
(1-8).
2a B-R2. In patients undergoing CABG, preoperative amiod arone is reasonable to reduce the incidence of post-
operative atrial ﬁbrillation ( 9-11 ).
2b B-NR3. In patients undergoing CABG, who do not have a cont raindication to beta blockers, preoperative use of
beta blockers may be effective in reducing i n-hospital and 30-day mortality rates ( 12-18 ).
2b B-NR4. In patients undergoing CABG, the role of preopera tive beta blockers for the prevention of acute post-
operative myocardial ischemia, stroke, AKI , or ventricular arrhythmia is uncertain ( 12-14 ,18).Lawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e80

Synopsis
In patients undergoing elective CABG, the risks and
bene ﬁts of beta-blocker and amiodarone administration
before surgery should be carefully considered. Althoughpreoperative beta blockers are associated with reduced
incidence of postoperative atrial ﬁbrillation, recent data,
including meta-analyses of RCTs and several largeobservational trial s, have yielded con ﬂicting results with
regard to their impact on other outcomes, includingdeath, MACE, and other arrhythmias.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supporting Text
1. Several small RCTs ( 1-5) and multiple meta-analyses
of RCTs ( 6-8) have investigated preoperative beta
blockers and found that their use is associated with areduced incidence of atrial ﬁbrillation after CABG.
Although the recommendation stems from what isconsidered high-quality evidence, full interpretationof the data is limited because the trials tended toincorporate multiple intervention arms, had variabletiming of initiation of therapy, and were unable to
establish the relative impact of preoperative beta-
blocker administration in the context of post-operative use. The overwhelming majority of trialsinvestigating the use of preoperative beta blockersare confounded by concomitant postoperativeadministration. As a result, the optimal agent selec-tion, schedule, and duration to prevent atrial ﬁbril-
lation are unclear.
2. Studies have demonstrated that preoperative prophy-
lactic oral amiodarone signi ﬁcantly decreased the
incidence of postoperative atrial arrhythmias andstroke and reduced hospital length of stay comparedwith placebo without any adverse complications otherthan occasional bradycardia ( 9,11,19). Amiodarone may
cause toxicity or systemic hypotension, and thus itsuse is determined on an individualized basis, particu-
larly in patients who are at high risk of developing
atrial ﬁbrillation.
3. Results from a large observational database suggested
that preoperative beta-blocker administration wasassociated with a reduction in in-hospital and 30-daymortality rate after CABG ( 16). These ﬁndings under-
pin the inclusion of preoperative beta blockers as aquality indicator for CABG surgery. Newer observa-
tional studies have yielded more con ﬂicting results
(12-14 ), showing little or no mortality bene ﬁt, particu-larly when comparisons between propensity-matched
participants are analyzed. Beta-blocker pharmacoge-netic variation may have a role. One study found that,when compared with no preoperative beta blockers,noncytochrome P4502D6 metabolized agents (i.e.,
atenolol and sotalol) were associated with a lower
incidence of operative death; however, P4502D6metabolized agents (i.e., metoprolol, propranolol, car-vedilol, and labetalol) were not ( 17). The impact of
preoperative beta-blocker administration in patientswith reduced left ventricular ejection fraction requiresadditional investigation ( 15,16).
4. Observational studies do not reveal a consistent asso-
ciation between preopera tive beta-blocker use and
other postoperative outcomes, including myocardialischemia, stroke or transient ischemic attack, and AKI(12-14 ). An area that likely requires further investiga-
tion is the ef ﬁcacy of preoperative beta blockers in the
prevention of ventricular arrhythmias. One meta-analysis of RCTs did suggest improved rates of ven-tricular arrhythmia, but most of the studies included
the outcome as a secondary endpoint ( 6,18). Patients
undergoing CABG who receive beta blockers are closelymonitored for bradycardia or hypotension, with sub-sequent dose adjustment to avoid these adverse ef-fects ( 4-7).
14. PHARMACOTHERAPY IN PATIENTS AFTER
REVASCULARIZATION
14.1. Pharmacotherapy for Risk Factor Control in Patients After
Revascularization
Patients undergoing coronary r evascularization require
aggressive secondary preventive measures, includinglifestyle modi ﬁcations and medications for control of
cholesterol, blood sugar, and blood pressure, as well as
antiplatelet therapies. A detailed discussion of the phar-
macotherapies used for secondary prevention afterrevascularization and the lifestyle measures used tooptimize heart health are beyond the scope of the presentguideline and are discussed in more detail elsewhere(1-4). This section will focus on the therapies that are
especially relevant to patients undergoingrevascularization.
14.2. Dual Antiplatelet Therapy in Patients After PCI
Recommendation for Dual Antiplatelet Therapy in Patients After PCI
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized in Online Data Supplement 44 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
2a A1. In selected patients undergoing PCI, shorter-duration DAPT (1 –3 months) is reasonable, with subsequent
transition to P2Y12 inhibitor monothera py to reduce the risk of bleeding events ( 1-4).JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee81

FIGURE 7 Use of DAPT for Patients After PCI
Colors correspond to Table 2 . ACS indicates acute coronary syndrome; BMS, bare metal stent; DAPT, dual antiplatelet therapy; DES, drug-eluting stent; P2Y12, platelet
adenosine diphosphate P2Y12 receptor; PCI, percutaneous coronary intervention; and SIHD, stable ischemic heart disease. This algorithm is adapte d from the 2016 DAPT
guideline ( 6) and includes new recommendations from this guideline for the care of patients with CAD. It is not meant to encompass every patient scenario or situati on, and
clinicians are encouraged to use a Heart Team approach when care decisions are unclear and to see the accompanying supportive text for each recommenda tion. Addi-
tionally, in situations that lack suf ﬁcient data to make formal recommendations for care, please see Section 17 ,“Unanswered Questions and Future Directions. ”Lawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e82

Synopsis
After PCI, the use of DAPT prevents stent thrombosis
and reduces ischemic events at the cost of increasedbleeding ( 5). Pooled data have demonstrated less bleeding
with shorter-term DAPT (3 –6 months) and fewer ischemic
events (including stent thrombosis) with longer-term
DAPT ( >12 months) ( 5)(Figure 7 ). The 2016 guideline
focused update on duration of DAPT ( 6) highlights the
importance of balancing ischemic and bleeding risk whenDAPT is considered and provides recommendations forshort and prolonged DAPT followed by aspirin mono-therapy after revascularization. Since the release of thoseguidelines, more recent trials have been published ( 1-4,7).
For this reason, additional recommendations for DAPT are
provided. These recommendations should act as a sup-plement to the prior guideline focused update. Given themultiplicity of possible antiplatelet regimens available foruse after revascularization, clinicians should weigh therisks of bleeding and recurrent ischemia when deter-mining the choice of DAPT.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supporting text
1. Since the 2016 guideline focused update, 5 large trials
have tested a strategy of shorter-duration DAPTfollowed by P2Y12 inhibitor monotherapy after PCI ( 1-
4,7) .D A P Td u r a t i o n sr a n g e df r o m1m o n t h( 3,7)t o3
months ( 1,2,4). In aggregate, these data support a
shorter course of DAPT followed by P2Y12 mono-therapy, with a reduction in bleeding events (when
compared with standard DAPT) and equivalent rates of
ischemic events. Most supported clopidogrel andticagrelor monotherapy, but prasugrel monotherapywas included in 1 trial ( 2). A meta-analysis of the
duration of DAPT incorporating these 5 trials reporteda 40% reduction in the rate of major bleeding eventswith shorter-term DAPT followed by P2Y12 mono-therapy and no signi ﬁcant difference in MACE. The
trials evaluating the use of shorter-duration DAPT
followed by P2Y12 monotherapy were not powered toassess differences in stent thrombosis. These trialsincluded few patients with STEMI. No trial hascompared short-term DAPT followed by P2Y12 mono-therapy with short-term DAPT followed by aspirinalone.
14.3. Antiplatelet Therapy in Patients After CABG
Recommendations for Antiplatel et Therapy in Patients After CABG
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplement 45 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1A1. In patients undergoing CABG, aspirin (100 –325 mg daily) should be initiated within 6 hours post-
operatively and then continued inde ﬁnitely to reduce the occurrence of SVG closure and adverse
cardiovascular events ( 1-7).
2b B-R2. In selected patients undergoing CABG, DAPT with aspirin and ticagrelor or clopidogrel for 1 year may be
reasonable to improve vein graft patency compared with aspirin alone ( 8-10 ).
Synopsis
The mechanisms warranting DAPT therapy in patients
who have undergone CABG are distinct from those in pa-tients who have had ACS and have undergone PCI. Thepathophysiology of vein graft occlusion involves a
different mechanism from that of native vessel disease
with atherosclerosis, plaque rupture, or stent thrombosis.Additionally, a larger percentage of the coronary tree isbypassed with CABG in contrast to the focal lesionstreated with PCI. Finally, surgical bleeding is more of aconcern in the perioperative and immediate postoperativeperiod following CABG. Observational and smallrandomized trials and meta- analyses of these studies
support that DAPT after CABG improves vein graftpatency, primarily among patients undergoing off-pumpsurgery and those with higher SYNTAX scores. The roleof DAPT in patients who undergo CABG after ACS is
addressed in the DAPT guideline ( 11) .T h er o l eo fp r o -
longed DAPT for general secondary prevention in patientswith a distant history of CABG is not well established.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁcS u p p o r t i n gT e x t
1. Surgical bleeding remains a concern in the periopera-
tive and immediate postoperative periods, andJACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee83

therefore bleeding risk is a n important consideration in
the use of antiplatelet ther apy. Older data have shown
that aspirin improves vein graft patency ( 1,2,5,6).
Although 1 small study demonstrated higher rates ofbleeding with aspirin after CABG ( 12), the totality of
evidence supports the early use ( 1-6)o fa s p i r i nt o
improve SVG patency and reduce ischemiccomplications.
2. Small RCTs, observational data, and meta-analyses
have demonstrated that DAPT (mostly with aspirinand clopidogrel) after CABG improves vein graftpatency, primarily among patients undergoing off-pump surgery. The DACAB (Different Antiplatelet
Therapy Strategy After Coronary Artery Bypass GraftSurgery) trial ( 10)c o m p a r e dD A P Tw i t has i n g l ea n t i -
platelet regimen in 500 patients undergoing CABG. Off-pump procedures were performed in 75% of these pa-
tients. At 1-year follow-up, the DAPT group was found
to have the highest vein graft patency, when assessedwith coronary computed t omography angiogram,
compared with aspirin alone.
14.4. Beta Blockers in Patients After Revascularization
Recommendation for Beta Blockers in Patients After Revascularization
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized in Online Data Supplement 46 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
3: No bene ﬁt C-LD1. In patients with SIHD and normal left ventricular function, the routine use of chronic oral beta blockers is
not bene ﬁcial to reduce cardiovascular events after complete revascularization ( 1-6).
Synopsis
In patients who have undergone revascularization, the
risks and bene ﬁts of beta blockers should be considered
before the initiation of therapy. The bene ﬁto fb e t a
blockers for secondary prevention after acute infarction orfor those with left ventricular dysfunction has been clearlyreported in clinical trials ex amining these subgroups, and
recommendations based on this evidence are outlined inprevious guidelines ( 7,8). However, in patients without
acute infarction or left ventricular dysfunction, there is a
paucity of data to support a bene ﬁto ft h er o u t i n eu s eo f
beta blockers after revascularization, especially in patientswithout residual disease. Further risk reduction may notbe useful in patients after MI with normal left ventricularejection fraction in the presence of GDMT with antiplatelettreatment, statins, and angio tensin-converting enzyme
inhibitors or angiotensin-receptor blockers. Thus, in the
absence of new data to guide current therapy, clinicians
will need to make decisions on an individualized basis.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. A large meta-analysis of patients undergoing PCI for
stable angina showed no differences in adjustedrates of death, MI, stroke, o rr e v a s c u l a r i z a t i o nb u ta
higher rate of heart failure readmissions among pa-
tients who were prescribed a beta blocker at hospitaldischarge ( 1). The REACH (Reduction of Athero-
thrombosis for Continued Health) Registry ’si n -
vestigators showed that, after a median of 44months ’follow-up, beta-blocker use was not associ-
ated with a reduction in the composite cardiovas-cular outcome in a large cohort of patients with
SIHD ( 2). Additional studies have also supported an
increased incidence of heart failure in patientstreated with beta blockers in the reperfusion era ( 9).
In a large cohort of patients with newly diagnosedCAD, a modest bene ﬁt of beta-blocker use was re-
ported, although this bene ﬁt was noted only in pa-
tients with a previous MI ( 4). Hence, the decision to
continue beta blockers in the long term in patients
after revascularization should be made on an indi-
vidualized basis.
14.5. Beta Blockers for the Prevention of Atrial Fibrillation After
CABG
Recommendation for Beta Blockers for the Prevention of Atrial Fibrillation After CABG
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized in Online Data Supplement 47 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
1 B-R1. In patients after CABG, beta blockers are reco mmended and should be started as soon as possible to
reduce the incidence or clinical se quelae of postoperative atrial ﬁbrillation ( 1-7).Lawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e84

Synopsis
New-onset postoperative atrial ﬁbrillation occurs in
about 18% of patients after CABG and is associated with a4-fold increased risk of stroke and a 3-fold increase in all-cause mortality rate ( 8,9). Postoperative atrial ﬁbrillation
after CABG can be challenging to prevent and treat.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. RCTs have yielded con ﬂicting results with regard to the
ability of beta blockers to in ﬂuence perioperative car-diovascular morbidity and mortality. A large meta-
analysis found that beta-blocker use may reduce theincidence of atrial ﬁbrillation and ventricular arrhyth-
mias and hospital stay ( 10) but found no evidence of a
difference in rates of early all-cause death, MI, cere-
brovascular events, hypotension, or bradycardia ( 10).
14.6. Antiplatelet Therapy in Patients With Atrial Fibrillation on
Anticoagulation After PCI
Recommendations for Antiplatelet Therapy in Patients Wi th Atrial Fibrillation on Anticoagulation After PCI
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplement 48 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-R1. In patients with atrial ﬁbrillation who are undergoing PCI and are t aking oral anticoagulant therapy, it is
recommended to discontinue aspirin treatment after 1 to 4 weeks while maintaining P2Y12 inhibitors in
addition to a non –vitamin K oral anticoagulant (rivaroxaban , dabigatran, apixaban, or edoxaban) or
warfarin to reduce the risk of bleeding ( 1-7).
2a B-R2. In patients with atrial ﬁbrillation who are undergoing PCI, are taking oral anticoagulant therapy, and are
treated with DAPT or a P2Y12 inhibitor monotherapy, it is reasonable to choose a non –vitamin K oral
anticoagulant over warfarin to reduce the risk of bleeding ( 1,3,4).
Synopsis
Patients undergoing PCI frequently have or develop
concomitant indications for anticoagulant therapy,including atrial ﬁbrillation, venous thromboembolism,
and prosthetic heart valves. The most robust evidence foranticoagulant management in such patients comes fromtrials in patients with atrial ﬁbrillation. The 2019 focused
update of the atrial ﬁbrillation guidelines ( 8)g a v eaC l a s s
2a recommendation to a P2Y12 inhibitor with a non –
vitamin K oral anticoagulant (rivaroxaban or dabigatran)or a vitamin K antagonist (warfarin) rather than tripletherapy with an anticoagulant and DAPT. Since the pub-lication of this guideline focused update, there have been2 additional trials ( 1,4) examining the bene ﬁts of dual
anticoagulant therapy after PCI in patients with atrial
ﬁbrillation. On the basis of analyses of these trials, the
recommendations for antiplatelet and anticoagulanttherapy after PCI in patients with atrial ﬁbrillation have
been updated.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supporting Text
1. Two recent trials —the AUGUSTUS (Safety and Ef ﬁcacy
of Apixaban Versus Vitamin K Antagonist and Aspirin
Versus Aspirin Placebo in Patients With Atrial
Fibrillation and ACS and/or PCI) trial ( 1)a n dt h e
ENTRUST-AF-PCI (Edoxaban –Based Versus Vitamin K
Antagonist –Based Antithrombotic Regimen After Suc-
cessful Coronary Stenting in Patients With AtrialFibrillation) trial ( 4)—examined regimens of apixaban
and edoxaban and supported earlier ﬁndings ( 6,7),
reporting lower bleeding rat es in patients with atrialﬁbrillation who were treated with a non –vitamin K oral
anticoagulant and P2Y12 inhibitor than in those treatedwith triple therapy after PCI. Although none of the trialswas powered for ischemic endpoints, pooled data fromthese trials ( 1) have shown rates of death, MI, and stent
thrombosis with dual therapy that are similar to thoseseen with triple therapy. All patients enrolled in these
trials were brie ﬂy treated with triple therapy after PCI
before the aspirin was discontinued. An analysis ofstent thrombosis rates suggested that 80% of eventsoccur within 30 days of PCI ( 3). For this reason, it is
possible that prolonging aspirin therapy to 1 month af-ter PCI may reduce the risk of stent thrombosis ( 3).
Therefore, in patients deemed to be at high risk of stentthrombosis, aspirin could be maintained for up to 30
days.
2. The AUGUSTUS trial ( 2) randomized patients with atrial
ﬁbrillation undergoing PCI and found that apixaban, as
compared with warfarin, reduced the rate of bleedingand was associated with a lower incidence of the com-bined endpoint of death or hospitalization. Comparedwith other treatment regimens, the combination ofapixaban with a P2Y12 inhibitor was associated with the
lowest rates of bleeding. The ENTRUST-AF-PCI trial ( 4)
compared edoxaban and P2Y12 monotherapy with tripletherapy with a vitamin K antagonist in patients withatrial ﬁbrillation undergoing PCI. Although there were
fewer bleeding events in the ﬁrst 14 days in the vitamin
K antagonist arm, a landmark analysis from 14 daysonward demonstrated less bleeding in the dual-therapygroup.JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee85

15. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR ADDRESSING
PSYCHOSOCIAL FACTORS AND LIFESTYLECHANGES AFTER REVASCULARIZATION
15.1. Cardiac Rehabilitation and Education
Synopsis
Cardiac rehabilitation is an evidence-based interven-
tion comprising patient education, behavior modi ﬁcation,
and exercise training to improve secondary preventionoutcomes in patients with CVD ( 8). Cardiac rehabilitation
assists patients with adherence to healthy lifestyle habits;
addresses comorbid conditions (e.g., diabetes); monitors
for safety issues, including new or recurrent symptoms;and facilitates adherence to evidence-based medicaltherapies ( 9). Cardiac rehabilitation may include a center-
based cardiac rehabilitation program that incorporatesface-to-face supervised exercise or an alternative cardiacrehabilitation delivery model that meets criteria for safetyand effectiveness, as speci ﬁed by the cardiac rehabilita-
tion guidelines of the American Association of Cardio-
vascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation ( 10).
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. The safety and effectiveness of the traditional, medi-
cally supervised center-based cardiac rehabilitationmodel are well established. Observational studies andRCTs have demonstrated th at center-based cardiac
rehabilitation is effective in reducing hospital read-
missions, secondary events, and deaths in patientswith CVD ( 1,2,4,11). Guidelines and standards of care
have been well de ﬁned for center-based cardiac reha-
bilitation, including core components ( 10), core com-
petencies ( 12), clinical practice guidelines ( 13),
performance measures ( 12), and certi ﬁcation (program
and individual) ( 9). Home-based cardiac rehabilitation
can help improve delivery of cardiac rehabilitation toeligible patients by overcoming common barriers that
impede a patient ’s participation in center-based car-
diac rehabilitation, including transportation chal-lenges, competing time demands, and lack of a center-based cardiac rehabilitation program near the patient ’s
home ( 14). Core components of home-based cardiac
rehabilitation are similar to those for center-based
cardiac rehabilitation ( 14). Cochrane reviews
concluded that home- and center-based cardiac reha-bilitation have similar effects on quality of life andcosts among patients with recent MI or coronaryrevascularization ( 15-17 ).
2. Patients and caregivers should receive a comprehen-
sive plan of care and educational materials during the
hospital stay that support adherence to evidence-based
therapies. The “2019 ACC/AHA Guideline on the Pri-
mary Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease ”(18)p r o -
vides comprehensive recommendations for improvingrisk factors for CVD (unhealthy dietary pattern, lack ofexercise and physical activit y, obesity, diabetes, high
blood cholesterol, hypertension, and tobacco use). Thisinformation and management can be accomplished in a
center-based or a home-based cardiac rehabilitation
program and should be tailored to age, health literacy,cultural practices, and socioeconomic status ( 7). The
basic self-care activities important to CVD managementare captured in the AHA ’sL i f e ’sS i m p l e7p r o g r a m( e . g . ,
smoking cessation, maintenance of body mass index,physical activity, healthy diet, maintaining lowcholesterol, maintaining normal blood pressure, and
maintaining normal fasting plasma glucose) ( 19).Recommendations for Cardiac Rehabilitation and Education
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplement 49 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1A1. In patients who have undergone revascularization, a c omprehensive cardiac rehabilitation program (home
based or center based) should be prescribed either before hospital discharge or during the ﬁrst outpatient
visit to reduce deaths and hospital readmissions and improve quality of life ( 1-4).
1 C-LD2. Patients who have undergone revascularization s hould be educated about CVD risk factors and their
modi ﬁcation to reduce cardiovascular events ( 5-7).Lawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e86

15.2. Smoking Cessation in Patients After Revascularization
Synopsis
Tobacco use, especially cig arette smoking, is a major
risk factor for cardiovascular morbidity and mortality andis the leading preventable cause of death worldwide ( 6,7).
Among patients with coronary heart disease, continued
cigarette smoking after revascularization is associatedwith adverse clinical outcomes ( 8), particularly stent
thrombosis ( 9). Electronic nicotine delivery systems or
e-cigarettes ( 10) are a class of tobacco product that
emit aerosol containing ﬁne and ultra ﬁne particulates,
nicotine, and toxic gases that may increase risk of CVDand pulmonary disease ( 11-13 ). The dominant pattern of
e-cigarette use in adults is dual use of both combustible
cigarettes and e-cigarettes ( 14,15). When patients are
counseled about risk factor management after revascu-larization, the topic of tobacco abuse is paramount andtimely, because patients who are hospitalized afterrevascularization are often at their most attentivestate. The recommendations for smoking cessationcounseling and treatment are outlined in the “2019
ACC/AHA Guideline on the Primary Prevention of
Cardiovascular Disease ”(16) and are also applicable to the
secondary prevention of patients after coronary arteryrevascularization.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. The U.S. Public Health Service ’sClinical Practice
Guideline for Smoking Cessation recommends smoking-
cessation pharmacotherapy for all smokers attempting
to quit ( 17) .T h em o s te f f e c t i v es m o k i n g - c e s s a t i o n
therapies include both behavioral and pharmacolog-ical interventions ( 1,6). High-quality evidence showed
that using a combination of behavioral support andmedication increases the chances of successfully quit-ting for at least 6 months ( 2,5). Moreover, the chance of
success was increased by 70% to 100% compared withjust brief advice or support. Among patients with CVD
who were motivated to quit smoking, varenicline andbupropion are ef ﬁcacious for smoking cessation, as are
individual and telephone counseling ( 2,5). Varenicline
was the most ef ﬁcacious of therapies in patients with
stable CVD who were motivated to quit smoking(2,5,18,19). In 1 study, abstinence rates in the group of
patients treated with varen icline were higher than in
those treated with placebo, a r esult that persisted for 52
weeks ( 19). Given the uncertainties of the long-term
effects of e-cigarettes on health, clinicians have beenurged to advise cigarette smokers seeking to quit to use
evidence-based, U.S. Food and Drug Administration –
approved, safe and effective smoking cessation phar-macotherapies as ﬁrst-line treatments in preference to
e-cigarettes ( 7).
2. Studies have shown that when hospitalized tobacco
users receive counseling with supportive follow-upfor$1 month after discharge, smoking cessation rates
increase by 37% at 6 to 12 months after discharge ( 4).
Varenicline use for hospitalized smokers with ACS who
were motivated to quit signi ﬁcantly increased absti-
nence versus placebo at 1 year after discharge ( 20-22 ).
At week 24, using varenicline increased smokingabstinence and reduced cigarette use by $50%. There
is no evidence that pharmacotherapies (varenicline,bupropion, and nicotine replacement versus placebo)increase the risk of cardiovascular adverse events
during or after treatment ( 19,21,23). The EAGLES
(Neuropsychiatric Safety and Ef ﬁcacy of Varenicline,
Bupropion, and Nicotine Patch in Smokers With andWithout Psychiatric Disorders) trial showed that phar-macotherapies do not increase the risk of cardiovas-c u l a ro rn e u r o p s y c h i a t r i c adverse events compared
with nicotine patch or placebo in smokers with andwithout psychiatric disorders ( 18,23).Recommendations for Smoking Cessation in Patients After Revascularization
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplement 50 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1A1. In patients who use tobacco and have undergone coronary revascularization, a combination of behavioral
interventions plus pharmacotherapy is recommended to maximize cessation and reduce adverse cardiac
events ( 1-3).
1A2. In patients who use tobacco and have undergone co ronary revascularization, smoking cessation
interventions are recommended during hospitalizati on and should include supportive follow-up for at
least 1 month after discharge to facilitate toba cco cessation and reduce morbidity and mortality ( 4-6).JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee87

15.3. Psychological Interventions in Patients After
Revascularization
Recommendations for Psychological Interventions in Patients After Revascularization
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplement 51 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-R1. In patients who have undergone coronary revascular ization who have symptoms of depression, anxiety, or
stress, treatment with cognitive behavioral therapy, psychological counseling, and/or pharmacological
interventions is bene ﬁcial to improve quality of life and cardiac outcomes ( 1-7).
2b C-LD2. In patients who have undergone coronary revascular ization, it may be reasonable to screen for depression
and refer or treat when it is indicated to improve quality of life and recovery ( 8,9).
Synopsis
Cardiac events and coronary revascularization can be
distressing life events that lead to psychosocial morbidity
(10-13 ). Anxiety, depression, and stress are associated with
poor adherence to healthy behaviors and prescribedmedications, compromised quality of life, increasedhealth care costs, and increased recurrent cardiac events(12,14-18 ) and are independent risk factors for CVD
morbidity and mortality ( 19-24 )(Figure 8 ). Presurgery es-
timates of depression in patients undergoing CABG rangefrom 14% to 43% ( 23,25-27 ), and depression increases
length of hospital stay ( 28) and mortality rate ( 14,23,29).
About 20% of patients who undergo CABG remaindepressed postoperatively ( 30). Several psychological
therapies have been used as part of secondary preventionto improve psychological outcomes. These include relax-ation and stress management, enhancement of copingskills, and cognitive behavioral therapy, many of whichare incorporated into cardiac rehabilitation programs
(3,31).
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. In the EsDEPACS (Escitalopram for Depression in Acute
Coronary Syndrome) trial, e scitalopram was superior to
placebo in reducing depression during the 24-week trial(32). Long-term follow-up showed that escitalopram
resulted in a signi ﬁcantly lower risk of MACE and MI
but not death ( 2). The ENRICHD (Enhancing Recovery in
Coronary Heart Dis ease Patients) trial demonstrated
that therapy with counseling or selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors was associated with improveddepression but not event-free survival after 24 monthsof follow-up ( 5). A subgroup analysis of this study,however, found a 42% lower risk of death or MI in pa-
tients treated with a selective serotonin reuptake in-hibitor ( 33) .T h eB y p a s s i n gt h eB l u e st r i a lr a n d o m i z e d
depressed patients undergoing CABG to 8 months of
collaborative care or usual care and demonstrated a50% reduction in depression scores and improvedquality of life in the collaborative care group ( 7,34). A
meta-analysis of these trials reported a reduction incardiovascular deaths but not overall deaths, MI, orrevascularization with psy chological interventions ( 1).
These interventions also impr oved depression, anxiety,
a n ds t r e s sa sc o m p a r e dw i t hc o n t r o l s( 1).
2. Depression remains an important comorbidity after
revascularization, and treatment options are under-used. On the basis of observational data and the avail-ability of effective depression treatments ( 35), multiple
professional societies recommend depression screeningfor patients with ACS, followed by treatment whendepression is identi ﬁed ( 8,19,36,37). Programs
combining depression screening, with support systems
in place, improve clinical outcomes in adults ( 1). How-
ever, in the CODIACS-QoL (Comparison of DepressionInterventions After Acute Coronary Syndrome: Qualityof Life) trial evaluating 1500 patients with ACS withouta history of depression, providing universal depressionscreening and notifying tre ating clinicians of positive
results of screening, either with or without provision of
enhanced depression care, did not alter quality oflife, depression-free days, depressive symptoms, mor-tality rate, or patient-reported harms in patients withACS ( 9). In this trial, a smaller-than-expected propor-
tion of patients with screening were found to havedepression.Lawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e88

16. REVASCULARIZATION OUTCOMES
16.1. Assessment of Outcomes in Patients After
RevascularizationFIGURE 8 Traditional and Psychosocial Risk Factors for ASCVD
ASCVD indicates atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease.
Recommendations for Assessment of Outcomes in Patients After Revascularization
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data Supplement 52 .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. With the goal of improving patient outcomes, it is recommended that cardiac surgery and PCI programs
participate in state, regional, or national clinical data registries and receive periodic reports of their
risk-adjusted outcomes as a quality assessment and improvement strategy ( 1-8).
2a C-LD2. With the goal of improving patient outcomes, it is reasonable for cardiac surgery and PCI programs to
have a quality improvement program that routinely 1) reviews institutional quality programs andoutcomes, 2) reviews individual operator outcomes, 3) provides peer review of dif ﬁcult or complicated
cases, and 4) performs random case reviews ( 9,10).
2b C-EO3. Smaller volume cardiac surgery and PCI programs may consider af ﬁliating with a high-volume center to
improve patient care.JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee89

Synopsis
Centers that provide coronary revascularization should
participate in clinical data registries with the intent toreview and continuously improve patient outcomes.Comparison of outcomes through the use of national da-
tabases allows individual- and program-level assessment
of the care provided and the opportunity to enhance carewith quality improvement initiatives. Collaboration withother centers allows peer review and discussion, as wellas sharing and adoption of effective quality improvementmeasures.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supporting Text
1. Participation in regional, state, or national registries
that provide regular, risk-adjusted outcomes is bene-
ﬁcial in quality assessment and improvement. It allows
participants to compare their performance to regionalor national validated benchmarks, identify opportu-nities for improvement, and disseminate best practices(1-8).
2. Quality and performance measures are de ﬁned by at-
tributes related to structure, processes, and risk-adjusted outcomes. Structural attributes include ele-
ments such as equipment, supplies, staf ﬁng, institu-
tion- and operator-level volumes, and electronic healthrecords. Processes include strategies for appropriatepatient selection; protocols for pre- and postprocedural
care, procedural execution, and management of com-plications; and participation in databases and registriesfor benchmarking the performance of the program andindividual operator. Risk-adjusted outcomes are the
end result of these structures and processes of care,
and when available, they may be more reliable mea-sures of quality than the institutional-level and indi-vidual operator –level volumes ( 9-11).
3. Smaller-volume coronary revascularization programs
may bene ﬁtf r o ma f ﬁliation and collaboration with
larger volume programs. Sta ndardized processes from
both centers may be shared bidirectionally, and peri-
odic exchange of staff will facilitate the transfer of best
practices. Teaching conferences, as well as conferenceson morbidity and mortality in both centers, may beshared via videoconferencing. In addition, residentsand fellows may rotate bet ween programs. Program
size is typically de ﬁned by the speci ﬁc database.
17. UNANSWERED QUESTIONS AND FUTURE
DIRECTIONS
The indications for revascularization and the approach to
treatment in patients with CAD are generally based onevidence supporting bene ﬁto rl a c kt h e r e o f .M a n yr e c -
ommendations for revascularization are derived from theresults of RCTs or observational studies of large registriesor cohorts of patients that show consistent trends in
outcomes. However, there are some patient subgroupsand clinical scenarios for wh ich there is a paucity of evi-
dence to support a formal recommendation. In addition,in some circumstances, it is inappropriate or unethical to
perform a randomized trial comparing 2 treatments.
Furthermore, in some situations, even in the absence ofstrong evidence, recommendations are created on thebasis of experiential consensus on best practices for thedelivery of care. In these cases, further research is neededto inform practice, which would enable updated recom-mendations based on clinical trial results.
17.1. Special Populations
17.1.1. Underrepresented Racial and Ethnic Groups
Despite advances in the identi ﬁcation of risk factors for
CVD and the widespread use of evidence-based strategies
to manage CVD, there are persistent sex, racial, and ethnic
disparities in the delivery of care and in morbidity and
mortality ( 1-8). Studies have shown that Black patients
and patients of South Asian descent with CAD have worseoutcomes than do White patients ( 2,4). Additionally,
studies have reported worse outcomes in women than inmen, although this ﬁnding is largely attenuated after
adjustment for differences in baseline presentation andtreatment ( 9). Recommendations for care in patients with
CAD are often derived from RCT data with an unequal
representation of women and racial and ethnic groups(10). Although a study ’sﬁndings might be extrapolated to
such populations, it is unclear whether similar outcomesc a nb ea s s u m e df r o mt h er e p o r t e dt r i a lr e s u l t sa c r o s sa l lpopulations of patients. For this reason, in the planning ofclinical trials, measures to ensure the enrollment of un-derrepresented racial and ethnic groups should be
implemented to inform better care of patients ( 11).
17.2. Special Clinical Situations
17.2.1. Left Ventricular Dysfunction
RCT data support the use of CABG for the treatment of
patients with coronary heart disease and left ventricular
dysfunction to improve survival ( 12-14 ). Although the
STICH trial reported impr o v e do u t c o m e sw i t hC A B G
compared with medical therapy, the advantage of CABGover medical therapy was independent of the presence orabsence of myocardial viability ( 15-17 ). Critics have
argued that the lack of a relative bene ﬁto fm y o c a r d i a l
viability in predicting outcome with CABG was largely ar e s u l to ft h et y p eo ft e s t i n gu s e d( 18). Many surgeons still
use viability testing to guide decisions about revascular-
ization in patients with severe left ventricular dysfunc-tion. Nevertheless, in view of the lack of association of
myocardial viability with derived bene ﬁtf r o mr e v a s c u -
larization, it remains unclear whether viability studiesLawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e90

should be used to inform clinic al practice, and if they are
used, it remains unclear which method of assessmentprovides the most useful information.
There are currently insuf ﬁcient data on the role of PCI
in patients with left ventricular dysfunction to improve
survival or cardiovascular outcomes. To address this gap
in evidence, the ongoing REVIVED-BCIS2 (PercutaneousRevascularization for Ischemic Ventricular Dysfunction)(19) study will evaluate the bene ﬁts of PCI versus
medical therapy in reducing the combined endpoint ofdeath or hospitalization for heart failure at 2 years ’
follow-up. Additional studies are also currently underway, including the ISCHEMIA –Heart Failure Planning
Study ( 20) ,w h i c hi se x p e c t e dt op a v et h ew a yf o ra
larger phase 3 trial of PCI in patients with systolic heartfailure.
17.2.2. SCAD
SCAD is increasingly recognized as a cause of ACS in
young patients, particularly women, and is present inroughly one-fourth of women #50 years of age presenting
with AMI ( 21). The management of SCAD has evolved over
the years toward a more cauti ous use of PCI after various
case series demonstrated low success rates and higher
rates of complications with PCI for SCAD, as well as goodlong-term outcomes in conser vatively treated patients
(22). For this reason, expert consensus statements
e m p h a s i z ec o n s e r v a t i v ec a r ei nm o s tp a t i e n t s( 23). How-
ever, managing patients with SCAD who have ongoingsymptoms, hemodynamic instability, or severelycompromised blood ﬂow of an artery subtending a large
amount of myocardium (i.e., the proximal LAD or left
main lesions) is particularly problematic, as conservativecare may not be a good option. Further investigationtherefore is needed to understand the ideal scenarios forproceeding with revascularization and the optimal tech-niques for revascularization in SCAD.
17.2.3. Coronary Artery Aneurysm
Coronary artery aneurysms and ﬁstulas are uncommon
ﬁndings on coronary angiography, with a reported prev-
alence of 0.02% to 0.2% ( 24,25). Most patients with cor-
onary artery aneurysms are asymptomatic, but coronaryartery aneurysms can lead to ischemia, vessel thrombosis,ﬁstula formation, or rupture ( 24-27 ). There are no ran-
domized studies evaluating the most effective therapy forthese patients. Case repo rts and case series have
described various methods for repair of aneurysms or
ﬁstulas, including covered s tenting, coil embolization,
Amplatzer device implantation, and surgical bypass withexclusion of the aneurysm ( 24-27 ). Because many patients
remain asymptomatic and treatments for aneurysms orﬁstulas are not well de ﬁned, information on the timing of
intervention (with respect to size and/or symptoms) andthe ideal approach to treatment (surgical excision versus
percutaneous therapies) is strongly needed.
17.2.4. Myocardial Bridging
Myocardial bridging occurs when there is systolic
compression of a coronary artery because of a segmentalintramyocardial course of the vessel, and it is seen in upto 25% of patients undergoing coronary angiography ( 28).
Although most myocardial bridging is clinically insigni ﬁ-
cant, severe bridging has been inferred to produce
myocardial ischemia, coronary thrombosis, AMI, and
stress cardiomyopathy ( 28). In patients with ischemic
pain and a myocardial bridge, provocative testing can beperformed by measuring FFR u nder baseline conditions
and during dobutamine stress or by obtaining positronemission tomographic imaging during adenosine vasodi-lator challenge ( 29). If a patient has evidence of severe
ischemia and a signi ﬁcant myocardial bridge, surgical
approaches are available; small studies have reported
subsequent improvement in angina, as documented bythe Seattle Angina Questionnaire ( 30
). Although these
data appear promising, the long-term risks and bene ﬁts of
surgery for myocardial bridging are uncertain, and largerstudies are needed to de ﬁne best practices in these
circumstances.
17.2.5. Treatment of Graft Failure
Robust data are also lacking for recommendations for
clinical situations that incl ude acute graft failure after
CABG, the percutaneous treatment of signi ﬁcant arterial
graft disease after CABG, and percutaneous interventionsvia an arterial graft after CABG. Such circumstances war-
rant discussion with a Heart Team and further
investigation.
17.2.6. Antiplatelet Therapy in Patients With ACS After CABG
With an Indication for Anticoagulation
Although antiplatelet therapy in patients with atrial
ﬁbrillation who are on anticoagulation after PCI is
detailed in Section 14.5 ., there are no data to inform the
treatment of patients after ACS who undergo CABG andalso have an indication for anticoagulation (atrial ﬁbril-
lation or mechanical valve). Care in such patients requiresfurther study and careful consideration of bleeding risks,recurrent ischemic events, graft patency, and risk of
thromboembolic events.
17.3. Revascularization Considerations
17.3.1. Use of the Radial Artery for a Conduit After Radial Artery
Catheterization
The number of patients undergoing radial artery cathe-
terization has increased exponentially over the years ( 31).
Some patients undergoing rad ial artery catheterization
will ultimately require CABG. In patients undergoingJACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee91

CABG, the radial artery is the preferred conduit after the
use of the LIMA ( 32). However, if the radial artery has
been manipulated (e.g., for access to perform coronary
angiography or intervention) , there is informal agreement
among surgeons to generally avoid the use of this artery
as a conduit for grafting, because of the ﬁndings of
reduced acute and long-term graft patency in such pa-tients ( 33,34) .I n t i m a lt e a r s ,m e d i a ld i s s e c t i o n s ,a n d
increased intimal thickness are frequently found afterradial artery catheterization ( 35), and greater intimal hy-
perplasia was noted in the radial artery in pathologystudies after radial artery catheterization ( 34). The
studies, which evaluated the integrity of the radial artery
early after radial artery cath eterization, were generally
performed within 6 weeks of the radial artery procedure.The persistence of these abnormal ﬁndings in the radial
artery in longer-term follow-up is uncertain. Given theincrease in the use of radial access for coronary angiog-raphy and intervention, it would be important to knowwhether these pathological ﬁndings remain over time.
Further research is needed to determine whether there is
healing of the radial artery and, if so, whether the radial
artery might be considered suitable for graft harvestingafter a prespeci ﬁed period of time that allows for
resumption of normal endothelial integrity.
17.3.2. Completeness of Revascularization in Multivessel Disease
In patients with multivessel d isease, when feasible, op-
erators often attempt to treat all vessels to allow for acomplete revascularization. There are no randomizedstudies prospectively comparing planned completeversus incomplete revascularization in SIHD, but several
observational studies have concluded that patients who
undergo CABG or PCI have worse outcomes if majorepicardial vessels with signi ﬁcant stenoses are not
revascularized during the index procedure ( 36-41 ). In the
SYNTAX trial, in which complete revascularization wasattempted in all patients, patients who underwent CABGor PCI with incomplete revascularization had worse car-diovascular outcomes at long-term follow-up ( 42).
Nevertheless, patients who have incomplete revasculari-
zation are more likely to have a greater burden ofcomorbidities, including older age, diabetes, renal failure,previous MI, lower left ventricular function, and moreextensive and complex coronary anatomy, that may alsoimpact the completeness of revascularization. Theobservational studies compa ring patients who receive
complete or incomplete revascularization cannot fully
account for the underlying reasons why an operator might
choose to revascularize only a limited area. It is reason-able to rationalize that complete revascularization toimprove perfusion of as large an amount of myocardiumas possible is a good strategy and likely improves patientoutcomes. Nevertheless, the ISCHEMIA trial, whichencouraged complete revascularization (especially if the
arteries supplied areas in which there was ischemia onstress testing), did not demonstrate improved cardiovas-cular outcomes with revascularization. As such, whenconsidering multivessel PCI or additional bypass grafting
during a CABG procedure, one must be mindful of the
theoretical bene ﬁts of complete revascularization for the
individual patient. RCTs are needed to examine the ben-eﬁts of complete revasculari zation in SIHD, with trial
designs that mimic the trials performed on patients withSTEMI and multivessel disease ( 43).
17.3.3. Hybrid Coronary Surgery
The hybrid approach to coro nary revascularization
(which combines minimally i nvasive off-pump grafting
of the LIMA to the LAD, with PCI of the remaining
vessels) has gained increasing popularity in recent years,although it is still performed by few select centers inthe United States ( 44). Small RCTs and observational
studies with propensity-matching of hybrid revasculari-zation versus conventional CABG ( 45-47 ) have found
similar rates of death, MI, stroke, and repeat revascular-ization. Unfortunately, the Hybrid Coronary Revasculari-
zation trial, a phase 3, large-scale, randomized trial
designed to compare multivessel PCI with hybridcoronary surgery in patients with disease of the LADand$1 additional stenoses, was terminated early
because of low enrollment (ClinicalTrials.gov identi ﬁer:
NCT03089398). For this reason, the role of hybrid surgeryas an alternative to multivessel PCI for patients withmultivessel disease involving the LAD remains unclear.
Furthermore, the Hybrid Coronary Revascularization trial
did not compare hybrid surgery as an alternative totraditional CABG and, as such, additional studies toevaluate the use of hybrid surgery in these circumstancesare needed. Other areas in need of further researchinclude the use of non-sternotomy coronary arteryrevascularization.
17.3.4. Revascularization Before Percutaneous Valve Procedures
The presence of CAD in patients referred for TAVR is
variable, with 15% to 81% of patients enrolled in thelandmark trials of TAVR having obstructive CAD ( 48).
Although the presence of CAD , particularly complex CAD,
is associated with worse outcomes after TAVR ( 49),
observational studies have not demonstrated improvedoutcomes when PCI is performed before TAVR ( 50). The
RCT that evaluated TAVR ve rsus surgical AVR advised
that PCI be performed before TAVR in patients with
proximal obstruction of large vessels ( 51). For this reason,
PCI is often planned before valve procedures, andguidelines indicate that PCI may be reasonable in patientswith severe disease of the proximal arteries ( 52). Never-
theless, this recommendation is based on limited data,Lawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e92

and therefore, further research is needed to determine
whether the routine use of PCI before percutaneous valveprocedures improves outcomes.
17.3.5. Revascularization Before Organ Transplantation
There are currently no RCTs evaluating the role of
revascularization before solid organ transplantation,although the RCT of revascularization before vascularsurgery did not report improved outcomes with PCI ( 53).
Nonetheless, because of the increased risk of cardiovas-
cular events among renal transplant recipients ( 54),
routine risk assessment is often performed beforeconsideration for transplantation. When obstructive CADis noted, many transplantation surgeons are hesitant toproceed with surgery in this c omplex group of patients
without revascularization; therefore, it is common for apatient to be referred for revascularization in preparation
for organ transplantation. In the Ischemia CKD trial, there
were no differences in outcomes with routine revascu-larization even in the presence of severe ischemia,although only about 10% of enrolled patients were on thewaitlist for transplantation. Even less is known aboutrevascularization before liver transplantation. For thisreason, it remains unclear w hether revascularization
before organ transplantati on imparts a better outcome,
and RCTs are needed to further inform care in this com-
plex group of patients.PRESIDENTS AND STAFF
American College of Cardiology
D i p t iN .I t c h h a p o r i a ,M D ,F A C C ,P r e s i d e n tCathleen C. Gates, Chief Executive Of ﬁcer
MaryAnne Elma, MPH, Senior Dir ector, Enterprise Content
and Digital Strategy
Grace D. Ronan, Team Leader, Clinical Policy PublicationsTimothy W. Schutt, MA, Clinical Practice Guidelines
Analyst
American College of Cardiology/American Heart AssociationThomas S.D. Getchius, Director, Guideline Strategy and
Operations
Abdul R. Abdullah, MD, Director, Guideline Science and
Methodology
American Heart AssociationMitchell S.V. Elkind, MD, MS, FAAN, FAHA, President
Nancy Brown, Chief Executive Of ﬁcer
Mariell Jessup, MD, FAHA, Chief Science and Medical
Ofﬁcer
Radhika Rajgopal Singh, PhD, Senior Vice President, Of ﬁce
of Science and Medicine
Johanna A. Sharp, MSN, RN, Science and Medicine
Advisor, Of ﬁce of Science, Medicine and Health
Jody Hundley, Production and Operations Manager,
Scienti ﬁcP u b l i c a t i o n s ,O f ﬁce of Science
OperationsJACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee93

REFERENCES
PREAMBLE
1.Committee on Standards for Developing Trust-
worthy Clinical Practice Guidelines, Institute of Medi-cine (U.S.). Clinical Practice Guidelines We Can Trust .
National Academies Press; 2011 .
2.Committee on Standards for Systematic Reviews of
Comparative Effectiveness Research, Institute ofMedicine (U.S.). Finding What Works in Health Care:
Standards for Systematic Reviews . National Academies
Press; 2011 .
3.Anderson JL, Heidenreich PA, Barnett PG, et al.
ACC/AHA statement on cost/value methodology inclinical practice guidelines and performance measures:a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Perfor-
mance Measures and Task Force on Practice Guide-
lines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;63:2304 –2322 .
4.ACCF/AHA/Task Force on Practice Guidelines.
Methodology Manual and Policies From the ACCF/AHATask Force on Practice Guidelines. American College ofCardiology and American Heart Association. 2010.
Accessed April 12, 2021. Available at: https://www.acc.
org/Guidelines/About-Guidelines-and-Clinical-Documents/Methodology andhttps://professional.heart.org/-/media/
phd-ﬁles/guidelines-and-statements/methodology_
manual_and_policies_ucm_319826.pdf
5.Halperin JL, Levine GN, Al-Khatib SM, et al. Further
evolution of the ACC/AHA clinical practice guidelinerecommendation classi ﬁcation system: a report of the
American College of Cardiology/American Heart As-sociation Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2016;67:1572 –1574 .
6.Arnett DK, Goodman RA, Halperin JL, et al. AHA/
ACC/HHS strategies to enhance application of clinicalpractice guidelines in patients with cardiovasculardisease and comorbid conditions: from the AmericanHeart Association, American College of Cardiology,and U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;64:1851 –1856 .
7.Levine GN, O ’Gara PT, Beckman JA, et al. Recent
innovations, modi ﬁcations, and evolution of ACC/AHA
Clinical Practice Guidelines: an update for our con-stituencies: a report of the American College of Car-diology/American Heart Association Task Force on
Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;73:
1990 –1998 .
1.4. Scope of the Guideline
1.Hillis LD, Smith PK, Anderson JL, et al. 2011 ACCF/AHA
guideline for coronary artery bypass graft surgery: a
report of the American College of Cardiology Founda-tion/American Heart Association Task Force on PracticeGuidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2011;58:e123 –e210 .
2.Levine GN, Bates ER, Blankenship JC, et al. 2011
ACCF/AHA/SCAI guideline for percutaneous coronary
intervention: a report of the American College of
Cardiology Foundation/American Heart AssociationTask Force on Practice Guidelines and the Society forCardiovascular Angiography and Interventions. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2011;58:e44 –e122 .
3.Levine GN, Bates ER, Blankenship JC, et al. 2015
ACC/AHA/SCAI focused update on primarypercutaneous coronary intervention for patients with
ST-elevation myocardial infarction: an update of the2011 ACCF/AHA/SCAI guideline for percutaneous cor-onary intervention and the 2013 ACCF/AHA guideline
for the management of ST-elevation myocardial
infarction: a report of the American College of Cardi-ology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clin-ical Practice Guidelines and the Society forCardiovascular Angiography and Interventions. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2016;67:1235
–1250 .
4.Fihn SD, Gardin JM, Abrams J, et al. 2012 ACCF/
AHA/ACP/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS guideline for thediagnosis and management of patients with stableischemic heart disease: a report of the American Col-lege of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Asso-
ciation Task Force on Practice Guidelines, and the
American College of Physicians, American Associationfor Thoracic Surgery, Preventive Cardiovascular NursesAssociation, Society for Cardiovascular Angiographyand Interventions, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2012;60:e44 –e164 .
5.O’Gara PT, Kushner FG, Ascheim DD, et al. 2013
ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of ST-elevation myocardial infarction: a report of theAmerican College of Cardiology Foundation/American
Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines.
J Am Coll Cardiol . 2013;61:e78 –e140 .
6.Amsterdam EA, Wenger NK, Brindis RG, et al. 2014
AHA/ACC guideline for the management of patients
with non-ST-elevation acute coronary syndromes: a
report of the American College of Cardiology/Amer-ican Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guide-lines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;64:e139 –e228 .
7.Al-Khatib SM, Stevenson WG, Ackerman MJ, et al.
2017 AHA/ACC/HRS guideline for management of pa-tients with ventricular arrhythmias and the preventionof sudden cardiac death: a report of the AmericanCollege of Cardiology/American Heart Association TaskForce on Clinical Practice Guidelines and the Heart
Rhythm Society. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2018;72:e91 –e220 .
8.Otto CM, Nishimura RA, Bonow RO, et al. 2020
ACC/AHA guideline for the management of patientswith valvular heart disease: a report of the American
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association
Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2021;77:e25 –e197 .
9.Arnett DK, Blumenthal R, Albert M, et al. 2019 ACC/
AHA guideline on the primary prevention of cardio-vascular disease: a report of the American College ofCardiology/American Heart Association Task Force onClinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;74:
e177 –e232 .
10.Levine GN, Bates ER, Bittl JA, et al. 2016 ACC/AHA
guideline focused update on duration of dual anti-platelet therapy in patients with coronary artery dis-ease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical
Practice Guidelines: an update of the 2011 ACCF/AHA/
SCAI guideline for percutaneous coronary intervention,2011 ACCF/AHA guideline for coronary artery bypassgraft surgery, 2012 ACC/AHA/ACP/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS guideline for the diagnosis and management ofpatients with stable ischemic heart disease, 2013
ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of ST-
elevation myocardial infarction, 2014 AHA/ACCguideline for the management of patients with non-
ST-elevation acute coronary syndromes, and 2014ACC/AHA guideline on perioperative cardiovascularevaluation and management of patients undergoing
noncardiac surgery. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2016;68:1082 –
1115.
11.Grundy SM, Stone NJ, Bailey AL, et al. 2018 AHA/
ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/ADA/AGS/APhA/ASPC/NLA/PCNA guideline on the management of blood
cholesterol: a report of the American College of Cardi-
ology/American Heart Association Task Force on ClinicalPractice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;73:e285 –
e350 .
12.Stout KK, Daniels CJ, Aboulhosn JA, et al. 2018
AHA/ACC Guideline for the management of adults with
congenital heart disease: a report of the AmericanCollege of Cardiology/American Heart Association TaskForce on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2019;73:e81 –e192 .
13.January CT, Wann LS, Alpert JS, et al. 2014 AHA/
ACC/HRS guideline for the management of patientswith atrial ﬁ
brillation: a report of the American College
of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Forceon Practice Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;64:e1 –e76.
14.January CT, Wann LS, Calkins H, et al. 2019 AHA/
ACC/HRS focused update of the 2014 AHA/ACC/HRSguideline for the management of patients with atrialﬁbrillation: a report of the American College of Car-
diology/American Heart Association Task Force on
Clinical Practice Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm So-
ciety. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;74:104 –132.
15.Wolk MJ, Bailey SR, Doherty JU, et al. ACCF/AHA/
ASE/ASNC/HFSA/HRS/SCAI/SCCT/SCMR/STS 2013multimodality appropriate use criteria for the detec-
tion and risk assessment of stable ischemic heart dis-
ease: a report of the American College of CardiologyFoundation Appropriate Use Criteria Task Force,American Heart Association, American Society ofEchocardiography, American Society of Nuclear Car-diology, Heart Failure Society of America, HeartRhythm Society, Society for Cardiovascular Angiog-
raphy and Interventions, Society of Cardiovascular
Computed Tomography, Society for CardiovascularMagnetic Resonance, and Society of Thoracic Sur-geons. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;63:380 –406.
16.Yancy CW, Jessup M, Bozkurt B, et al. 2013 ACCF/
AHA guideline for the management of heart failure: a
report of the American College of Cardiology Foun-dation/American Heart Association Task Force onpractice guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2013;62:e147 –
e239 .
17.Yancy CW, Jessup M, Bozkurt B, et al. 2017 ACC/
AHA/HFSA update of the 2013 ACCF/AHA guideline forthe management of heart failure: a report of theAmerican College of Cardiology/American Heart As-sociation Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines andthe Heart Failure Society of America. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2017;70:776 –803.
18.Whelton PK, Carey RM, Aronow WS, et al.
2017 ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/ASPC/NMA/PCNA guideline for the prevention,detection, evaluation, and management of high blood
pressure in adults: a report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force onLawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e94

Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2018;71:
e127 –e248 .
19.Barua RS, Rigotti NA, Benowitz NL, et al. 2018 ACC
expert consensus decision pathway on tobacco cessa-tion treatment: a report of the American College ofCardiology Task Force on Clinical Expert ConsensusDocuments. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2018;72:3332 –3365 .
20.Clinical Practice Guideline Treating Tobacco Use
and Dependence 2008 Update Panel, Liaisons, and
Staff. A clinical practice guideline for treating tobaccouse and dependence: 2008 update. A U.S. PublicHealth Service report. Am J Prev Med . 2008;35:158 –
176.
21.Lazar HL, Salm TV, Engelman R, et al. Prevention
and management of sternal wound infections. J Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg . 2016;152:962 –972.
22.Thomas RJ, Balady G, Banka G, et al. 2018 ACC/
AHA clinical performance and quality measures for
cardiac rehabilitation: a report of the American College
of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Forceon Performance Measures. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2018;71:
1814 –1837 .
23.Hayes SN, Kim ESH, Saw J, et al. Spontaneous
coronary artery dissection: current state of the science:a scienti ﬁc statement from the American Heart Asso-
ciation. Circulation . 2018;137:e523 –e557 .
24.van Diepen S, Katz JN, Albert NM, et al. Contem-
porary management of cardiogenic shock: a scienti ﬁc
statement from the American Heart Association. Cir-
culation . 2017;136:e232 –e268 .
25.Kulik A, Ruel M, Jneid H, et al. Secondary pre-
vention after coronary artery bypass graft surgery: ascienti ﬁc statement from the American Heart Associ-
ation. Circulation . 2015;131:927 –964.
26.American Diabetes Association. 8. Pharmacologic
approaches to glycemic treatment: standards ofmedical care in diabetes —2018. Diabetes Care .
2018;41:S73 –S85.
1.5. Class of Recommendation and Level of Evidence
1.ACCF/AHA Task Force on Practice Guidelines.
Methodology Manual and Policies From the ACCF/AHATask Force on Practice Guidelines. American College ofCardiology and American Heart Association. 2010.Accessed April 12, 2021. Available at: https://www.
acc.org/Guidelines/About-Guidelines-and-Clinical-
Documents/Methodology and https://professional.
heart.org/-/media/phd- ﬁles/guidelines-and-statements/
methodology_manual_and_policies_ucm_319826.pdf
2.1. Improving Equity of Care in Revascularization
1.O’Donoghue M, Boden WE, Braunwald E, et al. Early
invasive vs conservative treatment strategies in
women and men with unstable angina and non-ST-
segment elevation myocardial infarction: a meta-analysis. JAMA . 2008;300:71 –80.
2.Lee LC, Poh KK, Tang TPL, et al. The impact of
gender on the outcomes of invasive versus conserva-tive management of patients with non-ST-segmentelevation myocardial infarction. Ann Acad Med Sin-
gap. 2010;39:168 –172.
3.Tamis-Holland JE, Palazzo A, Stebbins AL, et al.
Beneﬁts of direct angioplasty for women and men with
acute myocardial infarction: results of the Global Use
of Strategies to Open Occluded Arteries in AcuteCoronary Syndromes Angioplasty (GUSTO II-B) An-gioplasty Substudy. Am Heart J . 2004;147:133 –139.4.Heer T, Hochadel M, Schmidt K, et al. Sex differ-
ences in percutaneous coronary intervention-insightsfrom the coronary angiography and PCI registry ofthe German Society of Cardiology. J Am Heart Assoc .
2017;6:e004972 .
5.Tamis-Holland JE, Lu J, Korytkowski M, et al. Sex
differences in presentation and outcome among pa-
tients with type 2 diabetes and coronary artery diseasetreated with contemporary medical therapy with orwithout prompt revascularization: a report from theBARI 2D Trial (Bypass Angioplasty RevascularizationInvestigation 2 Diabetes). J Am Coll Cardiol . 2013;61:
1767 –1776 .
6.Davis KB, Chaitman B, Ryan T, et al. Comparison of
15-year survival for men and women after initialmedical or surgical treatment for coronary artery dis-ease: a CASS registry study. Coronary Artery SurgeryStudy. J Am Coll Cardiol . 1995;25:1000 –1009 .
7.Gudnadottir GS, Andersen K, Thrainsdottir IS, et al.
Gender differences in coronary angiography, subse-quent interventions, and outcomes among patients
with acute coronary syndromes. Am Heart J . 2017;191:
65–74.
8.Golomb M, Redfors B, Crowley A, et al. Prognostic
impact of race in patients undergoing PCI: analysisfrom 10 randomized coronary stent trials. J Am Coll
Cardiol Intv . 2020;13:1586 –1595 .
9.Palmeri ST, Lowe AM, Sleeper LA, et al. Racial and
ethnic differences in the treatment and outcome of
cardiogenic shock following acute myocardial infarc-
tion. Am J Cardiol . 2005;96:1042 –1049 .
10.Sabatine MS, Blake GJ, Drazner MH, et al. In ﬂuence
of race on death and ischemic complications in pa-tients with non-ST-elevation acute coronary syn-dromes despite modern, protocol-guided treatment.Circulation . 2005;111:1217 –1224 .
11.Cantor JC, DeLia D, Tiedemann A, et al. Reducing
racial disparities in coronary angiography.
Health Aff
(Millwood) . 2009;28:1521 –1531.
12.Miller CD, Stopyra JP, Mahler SA, et al. ACES
(Accelerated Chest Pain Evaluation With Stress Imag-ing) protocols eliminate testing disparities in patientswith chest pain. Crit Pathw Cardiol . 2019;18:5 –9.
13.Rashid M, Fischman DL, Martinez SC, et al. Temporal
trends and predictors of time to coronary angiographyfollowing non-ST-elevation acute coronary syndrome in
the USA. Coron Artery Dis . 2019;30:159 –170.
14.Zhao M, Woodward M, Vaartjes I, et al. Sex dif-
ferences in cardiovascular medication prescription inprimary care: a systematic review and meta-analysis.J Am Heart Assoc . 2020;9:e014742 .
15.Arora S, Stouffer GA, Kucharska-Newton A, et al.
Fifteen-year trends in management and outcomes ofnon-ST-segment-elevation myocardial infarctionamong black and white patients: the ARIC community
surveillance study, 2000-2014. J Am Heart Assoc .
2018;7:e010203 .
16.Havranek EP, Mujahid MS, Barr DA, et al. Social
determinants of risk and outcomes for cardiovasculardisease: a scienti ﬁc statement from the American
Heart Association. Circulation . 2015;132:873 –898.
17.Walli-Attaei M, Joseph P, Rosengren A, et al. Var-
iations between women and men in risk factors,
treatments, cardiovascular disease incidence, and
death in 27 high-income, middle-income, and low-income countries (PURE): a prospective cohort study.
Lancet . 2020;396:97 –109.
18.Backholer K, Peters SAE, Bots SH, et al. Sex dif-
ferences in the relationship between socioeconomicstatus and cardiovascular disease: a systematic reviewand meta-analysis. J Epidemiol Community Health .
2017;71:550 –557.
19.Malambo P, Kengne AP, De Villiers A, et al. Built
environment, selected risk factors and major cardio-
vascular disease outcomes: a systematic review. PLoS
One. 2016;11:e0166846 .
20.Carnethon MR, Pu J, Howard G, et al. Cardiovas-
cular health in African Americans: a scienti ﬁc state-
ment from the American Heart Association. Circulation .
2017;136:e393 –e423 .
21.Volgman AS, Palaniappan LS, Aggarwal NT, et al.
Atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease in South Asiansin the United States: epidemiology, risk factors, and
treatments: a scienti ﬁc statement from the American
Heart Association. Circulation . 2018;138:e1 –e34.
22.Rodriguez CJ, Allison M, Daviglus ML, et al. Status
of cardiovascular disease and stroke in Hispanics/
Latinos in the United States: a science advisory fromthe American Heart Association. Circulation . 2014;130:
593–625.
23.Beohar N, Davidson CJ, Massaro EM, et al. The
impact of race/ethnicity on baseline characteristics andthe burden of coronary atherosclerosis in the Bypass
Angioplasty Revascularization Investigation 2 Diabetes
trial. Am Heart J . 2011;161:755 –763.
24.Mehran R, Chandrasekhar J, Davis S, et al. Impact
of race and ethnicity on the clinical and angiographiccharacteristics, social determinants of health, and 1-year outcomes after everolimus-eluting coronarystent procedures in women. Circ Cardiovasc Interv .
2019;12:e006918 .
25.Feinstein M, Ning H, Kang J, et al. Racial differ-
ences in risks for ﬁrst cardiovascular events and non-
cardiovascular death: the Atherosclerosis Risk inCommunities study, the Cardiovascular Health Study,and the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis. Circu-
lation . 2012;126:50 –59.
26.Pursnani S, Merchant M. South Asian ethnicity as a
risk factor for coronary heart disease. Atherosclerosis .
2020;315:126 –130.
27.Sonel AF, Good CB, Mulgund J, et al. Racial vari-
ations in treatment and outcomes of black and white
patients with high-risk non-ST-elevation acute coro-
nary syndromes: insights from CRUSADE (Can RapidRisk Strati ﬁcation of Unstable Angina Patients Sup-
press Adverse Outcomes With Early Implementation ofthe ACC/AHA Guidelines?). Circulation . 2005;111:1225 –
1232 .
28.Pearte CA, Myerson M, Coresh J, et al. Variation
and temporal trends in the use of diagnostic testingduring hospitalization for acute myocardial infarctionby age, gender, race, and geography (the Atheroscle-rosis Risk In Communities Study). Am J Cardiol .
2008;101:1219 –1225 .
29.Freund KM, Jacobs AK, Pechacek JA, et al. Dis-
parities by race, ethnicity, and sex in treating acute
coronary syndromes. J Womens Health (Larchmt) .
2012;21:126 –132.
30.Vaccarino V, Rathore SS, Wenger NK, et al. Sex and
racial differences in the management of acutemyocardial infarction, 1994 through 2002. N Engl J
Med. 2005;353:671 –682.JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee95

31.Cenko E, Yoon J, Kedev S, et al. Sex differences in
outcomes after STEMI: effect modi ﬁcation by treat-
ment strategy and age. JAMA Intern Med . 2018;178:
632–639.
32.Blomkalns AL, Chen AY, Hochman JS, et al. Gender
disparities in the diagnosis and treatment of non-ST-segment elevation acute coronary syndromes: large-
scale observations from the CRUSADE (Can Rapid
Risk Strati ﬁcation of Unstable Angina Patients Sup-
press Adverse Outcomes With Early Implementation ofthe American College of Cardiology/American HeartAssociation Guidelines) National Quality ImprovementInitiative. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2005;45:832 –837.
33.Asleh R, Manemann SM, Weston SA, et al. Sex
differences in outcomes after myocardial infarction in
the community. Am J Med . 2021;134:114 –121.
34.Iantorno M, Rogers T, Torguson R, et al. Racial
disparities in clinical characteristics and outcomes ofwomen undergoing percutaneous coronary interven-tion. Cardiovasc Revasc Med . 2019;20:1039 –1042 .
35.Hravnak M, Whittle J, Kelley ME, et al. Symptom
expression in coronary heart disease and revasculari-zation recommendations for black and white patients.Am J Public Health . 2007;97:1701 –1708 .
36.Mirvis DM, Graney MJ. Impact of race and age on
the effects of regionalization of cardiac procedures in
the Department of Veterans Affairs health care sys-
tem. Am J Cardiol . 1998;81:982 –987.
37.Vaccarino V, Parsons L, Every NR, et al. Sex-based
differences in early mortality after myocardial infarc-tion. National Registry of Myocardial Infarction 2 Par-ticipants. N Engl J Med . 1999;341:217 –225.
38.Shaw LJ, Shaw RE, Merz CNB, et al. Impact of
ethnicity and gender differences on angiographic cor-onary artery disease prevalence and in-hospital mor-tality in the American College of Cardiology-National
Cardiovascular Data Registry. Circulation . 2008;117:
1787 –1801 .
39.Thomas KL, Honeycutt E, Shaw LK, et al. Racial
differences in long-term survival among patients withcoronary artery disease. Am Heart J . 2010;160:744 –751.
40.Lichtman JH, Wang Y, Jones SB, et al. Age and sex
differences in inhospital complication rates and mor-tality after percutaneous coronary intervention pro-cedures: evidence from the NCDR. Am Heart J .
2014;167:376 –383.
41.Mehta JL, Bursac Z, Mehta P, et al. Racial dispar-
ities in prescriptions for cardioprotective drugs and
cardiac outcomes in Veterans Affairs Hospitals. Am J
Cardiol . 2010;105:1019
–1023 .
42.Gregory PC, LaVeist TA, Simpson C. Racial dispar-
ities in access to cardiac rehabilitation. Am J Phys Med
Rehabil . 2006;85:705 –710.
43.Lutﬁyya MN, Lipsky MS, Bales RW, et al. Disparities
in knowledge of heart attack and stroke symptomsamong adult men: an analysis of behavioral risk factorsurveillance survey data. J Natl Med Assoc . 2008;100:
1116 –1124.
44.Pamboukian SV, Funkhouser E, Child IG, et al.
Disparities by insurance status in quality of care forelderly patients with unstable angina. Ethn Dis .
2006;16:799 –807.
45.Trivedi AN, Sequist TD, Ayanian JZ. Impact of
hospital volume on racial disparities in cardiovascularprocedure mortality. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2006;47:417 –
424.46.Nallamothu BK, Lu X, Vaughan-Sarrazin MS, et al.
Coronary revascularization at specialty cardiac hospi-tals and peer general hospitals in Black Medicarebeneﬁciaries. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes . 2008;1:
116–122.
47.Kim DH, Daskalakis C, Lee AN, et al. Racial
disparity in the relationship between hospital volume
and mortality among patients undergoing coronary
artery bypass grafting. Ann Surg . 2008;248:886 –892.
48.Li S, Chen A, Mead K. Racial disparities in the use
of cardiac revascularization: does local hospital ca-pacity matter? PLoS One . 2013;8:e69855 .
49.Cram P, Bayman L, Popescu I, et al. Racial dis-
parities in revascularization rates among patients withsimilar insurance coverage. J Natl Med Assoc .
2009;101:1132 –1139.
50.Mahajan AM, Claessen BE, Chandrasekhar J, et al.
Outcomes by gender and ethnicity after percutaneous
coronary intervention. Am J Cardiol . 2019;123:1941 –
1948 .
51.Schulman KA, Berlin JA, Harless W, et al. The effect
of race and sex on physicians ’recommendations for
cardiac catheterization. N Engl J Med . 1999;340:618 –
626.
52.Sullivan LT 2nd, Mulder H, Chiswell K, et al. Racial
differences in long-term outcomes among black andwhite patients with drug-eluting stents. Am Heart J .
2019;214:46 –53.
53.Gaglia MA Jr, Steinberg DH, Pinto Slottow TL, et al.
Racial disparities in outcomes following percutaneous
coronary intervention with drug-eluting stents. Am J
Cardiol . 2009;103:653 –658.
54.Chen MS, Bhatt DL, Chew DP, et al. Outcomes in
African Americans and Whites after percutaneous cor-onary intervention. Am J Med . 2005;118:1019 –1025 .
55.Kaul U, Patel TM, Zambahari R, et al. Evaluation of
the XIENCE V everolimus eluting coronary stent sys-tem in the Asian population of the SPIRIT V single armstudy. 2-year clinical follow-up data. Indian Heart J .
2011;63:402 –408.
56.Krishnamurthy A, Keeble C, Burton-Wood N, et al.
Clinical outcomes following primary percutaneouscoronary intervention for ST-elevation myocardialinfarction according to sex and race. Eur Heart J Acute
Cardiovasc Care . 2019;8:264 –272.
57.Rubini Gimenez M, Zeymer U, Desch S, et al. Sex-
Speci ﬁc management in patients with acute myocardial
infarction and cardiogenic shock: a substudy of theCULPRIT-SHOCK trial. Circ Cardiovasc Interv . 2020;13:
e008537 .
2.2. Shared Decision-Making and Informed Consent
1.Lamore K, Montalescot L, Untas A. Treatment
decision-making in chronic diseases: what are the family
members ’roles, needs and attitudes? A systematic re-
view. Patient Educ Couns . 2017;100:2172 –2181 .
2.Stacey D, Bennett CL, Barry MJ, et al. Decision aids for
people facing health treatment or screening decisions.Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2011;10:CD001431 .
3.Lin GA, Fagerlin A. Shared decision making: state of
the science. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes . 2014;7:
328–334.
4.Ting HH, Brito JP, Montori VM. Shared decision
making: science and action. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Out-
comes . 2014;7:323 –327.5.Hughes TM, Merath K, Chen Q, et al. Association of
shared decision-making on patient-reported healthoutcomes and healthcare utilization. Am J Surg .
2018;216:7 –12.
6.Chewning B, Bylund CL, Shah B, et al. Patient
preferences for shared decisions: a systematic review.Patient Educ Couns . 2012;86:9 –18
.
7.Magnani JW, Mujahid MS, Aronow HD, et al. Health
literacy and cardiovascular disease: fundamental rele-vance to primary and secondary prevention: a scienti ﬁc
statement from the American Heart Association. Cir-
culation . 2018;138:e48 –e74.
8.Neumann F-J, Sousa-Uva M, Ahlsson A, et al. 2018
ESC/EACTS guidelines on myocardial revascularization.Eur Heart J . 2019;40:87 –165.
9.Schultz WM, Kelli HM, Lisko JC, et al. Socioeco-
nomic status and cardiovascular outcomes: challenges
and interventions. Circulation . 2018;137:2166 –2178 .
10.Martínez-García M, Salinas-Ortega M, Estrada-
Arriaga I, et al. A systematic approach to analyze thesocial determinants of cardiovascular disease. PLoS
One. 2018;13:e0190960 .
11.Mosquera PA, San Sebastian M, Waenerlund A-K,
et al. Income-related inequalities in cardiovasculardisease from mid-life to old age in a northern Swedish
cohort: a decomposition analysis. Soc Sci Med .
2016;149:135 –144.
12.Khaing W, Vallibhakara SA, Attia J, et al. Effects of
education and income on cardiovascular outcomes: asystematic review and meta-analysis. Eur J Prev Car-
diol. 2017;24:1032 –1042 .
13.Baggett TP, Liauw SS, Hwang SW. Cardiovascular
disease and homelessness. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2018;71:
2585 –2597 .
14.Stacey D, Légaré F, Lewis K, et al. Decision aids for
people facing health treatment or screening decisions.Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2017;4:CD001431 .
15.Perez Jolles M, Richmond J, Thomas KC. Minority
patient preferences, barriers, and facilitators forshared decision-making with health care providers inthe USA: a systematic review. Patient Educ Couns .
2019;102:1251 –1262 .
16.Provance JB, Spertus JA, Decker C, et al. Assessing
patient preferences for shared decision-making in pe-ripheral artery disease. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes .
2019;12:e005730 .
17.Arnett DK, Blumenthal RS, Albert MA, et al. 2019
ACC/AHA guideline on the primary prevention of car-diovascular disease: a report of the American Collegeof Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Forceon Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2019;74:e177 –e232 .
18.Havranek EP, Mujahid MS, Barr DA, et al. Social
determinants of risk and outcomes for cardiovasculardisease: a scienti ﬁc statement from the American
Heart Association. Circulation
. 2015;132:873 –898.
19.Elwyn G, Frosch DL, Kobrin S. Implementing
shared decision-making: consider all the conse-quences. Implement Sci . 2016;11:114 .
20.Milky G, Thomas J 3rd. Shared decision making,
satisfaction with care and medication adherenceamong patients with diabetes. Patient Educ Couns .
2020;103:661 –669.
21.Fihn SD, Gardin JM, Abrams J, et al. 2012 ACCF/
AHA/ACP/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS guideline for theLawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e96

diagnosis and management of patients with stable
ischemic heart disease: a report of the American Col-lege of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Asso-ciation Task Force on Practice Guidelines, and theAmerican College of Physicians, American Association
for Thoracic Surgery, Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses
Association, Society for Cardiovascular Angiographyand Interventions, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2012;60:e44 –e164 .
22.Whitney SN, McGuire AL, McCullough LB.
A typology of shared decision making, informed con-sent, and simple consent. Ann Intern Med . 2004;140:
54–59.
23.Smith SC Jr, Benjamin EJ, Bonow RO, et al. AHA/
ACCF secondary prevention and risk reduction therapy
for patients with coronary and other atheroscleroticvascular disease: 2011 update: a guideline from theAmerican Heart Association and American College ofCardiology Foundation. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2011;58:
2432 –2446 .
24.Levine GN, Bates ER, Blankenship JC, et al. 2011
ACCF/AHA/SCAI guideline for percutaneous coronaryintervention: a report of the American College ofCardiology Foundation/American Heart AssociationTask Force on Practice Guidelines and the Society for
Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2011;58:e44 –e122 .
25.Hillis LD, Smith PK, Anderson JL, et al. 2011 ACCF/
AHA guideline for coronary artery bypass graft sur-
gery: a report of the American College of Cardiology
Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force onPractice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2011;58:e123 –
e210 .
26.Kipp R, Lehman J, Israel J, et al. Patient prefer-
ences for coronary artery bypass graft surgery orpercutaneous intervention in multivessel coronary ar-tery disease. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv . 2013;82:212 –
218.
27.Ottawa Hospital Research Institute. Patient Deci-
sion Aids: Implementation Toolkit. 2014. AccessedJune 25, 2021. Available at: https://decisionaid.ohri.
ca/implement.html
28.Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. The
SHARE Approach —Essential Steps of Shared Decision-
making: Quick Reference Guide. 2020. Accessed June25, 2021. Available at: https://www.ahrq.gov/health-
literacy/professional-training/shared-decision/tools/resource-1.html
3.1. The Heart Team
1.Bonzel T, Schächinger V, Dörge H. Description of a
Heart Team approach to coronary revascularizationand its bene ﬁcial long-term effect on clinical events
after PCI. Clin Res Cardiol . 2016;105:388 –400.
2.Chu D, Anastacio MM, Mulukutla SR, et al. Safety
and ef ﬁcacy of implementing a multidisciplinary heart
team approach for revascularization in patients withcomplex coronary artery disease: an observationalcohort pilot study. JAMA Surg . 2014;149:1109 –1112.
3.Leonardi S, Marino M, Crimi G, et al. APpropriAte-
ness of percutaneous Coronary interventions in pa-tients with ischaemic HEart disease in Italy: theAPACHE pilot study. BMJ Open . 2017;7:e016909 .
4.Pavlidis AN, Perera D, Karamasis GV, et al. Imple-
mentation and consistency of Heart Team decision-making in complex coronary revascularisation.
Int J
Cardiol . 2016;206:37 –41.
5.Sanchez CE, Dota A, Badhwar V, et al. Revasculari-
zation heart team recommendations as an adjunct toappropriate use criteria for coronary revascularizationin patients with complex coronary artery disease.Catheter Cardiovasc Interv . 2016;88:e103 –e112.
6.Yamasaki M, Abe K, Horikoshi R, et al. Enhanced
outcomes for coronary artery disease obtained by a
multidisciplinary heart team approach. Gen Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg . 2019;67:841 –848.
7.Patterson T, McConkey HZR, Ahmed-Jushuf F, et al.
Long-term outcomes following heart team revascu-larization recommendations in complex coronary ar-tery disease. J Am Heart Assoc . 2019;8:e011279 .
8.Mohr FW, Morice M-C, Kappetein AP, et al. Coronary
artery bypass graft surgery versus percutaneous cor-onary intervention in patients with three-vessel dis-
ease and left main coronary disease: 5-year follow-up
of the randomised, clinical SYNTAX trial. Lancet .
2013;381:629 –638.
9.Ram E, Goldenberg I, Kassif Y, et al. Comparison of
patients with multivessel disease treated at centerswith and without on-site cardiac surgery. J Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg . 2018;155:865 –873.e3 .
10.King SB 3rd, Barnhart HX, Kosinski AS, et al. Angio-
plasty or surgery for multivessel coronary artery disease:comparison of eligible registry and randomized patients
in the EAST trial and in ﬂuence of treatment selection on
outcomes. Emory Angioplasty versus Surgery Trial In-vestigators. Am J Cardiol . 1997;79:1453 –1459 .
11.Feit F, Brooks MM, Sopko G, et al. Long-term
clinical outcome in the Bypass Angioplasty Revascu-larization Investigation Registry: comparison with therandomized trial. BARI Investigators. Circulation .
2000;101:2795 –2802 .
3.2. Predicting Patient Risk of Death With CABG
1.Osnabrugge RL, Speir AM, Head SJ, et al. Perfor-
mance of EuroSCORE II in a large US database: impli-cations for transcatheter aortic valve implantation. Eur
J Cardiothorac Surg . 2014;46:400 –408.
2.Ad N, Holmes SD, Patel J, et al. Comparison of
EuroSCORE II, Original EuroSCORE, and The Society ofThoracic Surgeons Risk Score in Cardiac Surgery Pa-
tients. Ann Thorac Surg . 2016;102:573 –579.
3.O’Brien SM, Feng L, He X, et al. The Society of
Thoracic Surgeons 2018 adult cardiac surgery risk
models: part 2-statistical methods and results. Ann
Thorac Surg . 2018;105:1419 –1428 .
4.Shahian DM, Jacobs JP, Badhwar V, et al. The So-
ciety of Thoracic Surgeons 2018 adult cardiac surgeryrisk models: part 1-background, design considerations,and model development. Ann Thorac Surg . 2018;105:
1411 –1418 .
5.Nashef SA, Roques F, Sharples LD, et al. EuroSCORE
II.Eur J Cardiothorac Surg . 2012;41:734 –744. discus-
sion 44-5 .
6.Thielmann M, Mechmet A, Neuhäuser M, et al. Risk
prediction and outcomes in patients with liver cirrhosisundergoing open-heart surgery. Eur J Cardiothorac
Surg. 2010;38:592 –599.
7.Modi A, Vohra HA, Barlow CW. Do patients with liver
cirrhosis undergoing cardiac surgery have acceptable
outcomes? Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg . 2010;11:
630 –634.8.Reichart D, Rosato S, Nammas W, et al. Clinical
frailty scale and outcome after coronary artery bypassgrafting. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg . 2018;54:1102 –1109 .
9.Sündermann S, Dademasch A, Rastan A, et al. One-
year follow-up of patients undergoing elective car-diac surgery assessed with the ComprehensiveAssessment of Frailty test and its simpli ﬁed form.
Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg . 2011;13:119 –123;
discussion 23 .
10.Sündermann SH, Dademasch A, Seifert B, et al.
Frailty is a predictor of short- and mid-term mortalityafter elective cardiac surgery independently of age.Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg . 2014;18:580 –585.
11.Aﬁlalo J, Eisenberg MJ, Morin JF, et al. Gait speed
as an incremental predictor of mortality and majormorbidity in elderly patients undergoing cardiac sur-
gery. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2010;56:1668 –1676 .
12.Aﬁlalo J, Mottillo S, Eisenberg MJ, et al. Addition
of frailty and disability to cardiac surgery risk scores
identi ﬁes elderly patients at high risk of mortality or
major morbidity. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes .
2012;5:222 –228.
13.Lytwyn J, Stammers AN, Kehler DS, et al. The
impact of frailty on functional survival in patients 1year after cardiac surgery. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg .
2017;154:1990 –1999 .
14.Sepehri A, Beggs T, Hassan A, et al. The impact of
frailty on outcomes after cardiac surgery: a systematic
review. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2014;148:3110 –3117.
15.Ringaitien _e D, Gineityt _e D, Vicka V, et al. Impact of
malnutrition on postoperative delirium developmentafter on pump coronary artery bypass grafting.J Cardiothorac Surg . 2015;10:74 .
16.Lomivorotov VV, Efremov SM, Boboshko VA, et al.
Prognostic value of nutritional screening tools forpatients scheduled for cardiac surgery. Interact Car-
diovasc Thorac Surg . 2013;16:612 –618.
17.Bayir H, Yildiz I. Malnutrition and adverse effects in
cardiac surgery. Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2015;63:349 –
350.
4 . 1 .A n g i o g r a p h yt oD e ﬁne Anatomy and Assess
Lesion Severity
1.Adjedj J, Xaplanteris P, Toth G, et al. Visual and
quantitative assessment of coronary stenoses atangiography versus fractional ﬂow reserve: the impact
of risk factors. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging . 2017;10:
e006243 .
2.Beauman GJ, Vogel RA. Accuracy of individual and
panel visual interpretations of coronary arteriograms:
implications for clinical decisions. J Am Coll Cardiol .
1990;16:108 –113.
3.Fleming RM, Kirkeeide RL, Smalling RW, et al. Pat-
terns in visual interpretation of coronary arteriogramsas detected by quantitative coronary arteriography.J Am Coll Cardiol . 1991;18:945 –951.
4.Goldberg RK, Kleiman NS, Minor ST, et al. Com-
parison of quantitative coronary angiography to visualestimates of lesion severity pre and post PTCA. Am
Heart J . 1990;119:178 –184.
5.Nallamothu BK, Spertus JA, Lansky AJ, et al. Com-
parison of clinical interpretation with visual assess-
ment and quantitative coronary angiography in
patients undergoing percutaneous coronary interven-tion in contemporary practice: the Assessing Angiog-raphy (A2) project. Circulation . 2013;127:1793 –1800 .JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee97

4.2. De ﬁning Coronary Artery Lesion
Complexity: Calculation of the SYNTAX (SynergyBetween PCI With TAXUS and Cardiac Surgery)
Score
1.Sianos G, Morel M-A, Kappetein AP, et al. The
SYNTAX Score: an angiographic tool grading thecomplexity of coronary artery disease. Euro-
Intervention . 2005;1:219 –227.
2.Garg S, Serruys PW, Silber S, et al. The prognostic
utility of the SYNTAX score on 1-year outcomes
after revascularization with zotarolimus- andeverolimus-eluting stents: a substudy of the RESO-LUTE All Comers Trial. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv . 2011;4:
432–441.
3.Wykrzykowska JJ, Garg S, Girasis C, et al. Value
of the SYNTAX score for risk assessment in the all-comers population of the randomized multicenter
LEADERS (Limus Eluted from A Durable versus
ERodable Stent coating) trial. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2010;56:272 –277.
4.Cavalcante R, Sotomi Y, Mancone M, et al. Impact of
the SYNTAX scores I and II in patients with diabetesand multivessel coronary disease: a pooled analysis ofpatient level data from the SYNTAX, PRECOMBAT, andBEST trials. Eur Heart J . 2017;38:1969 –1977 .
5.Farooq V, van Klaveren D, Steyerberg EW, et al.
Anatomical and clinical characteristics to guide deci-
sion making between coronary artery bypass surgeryand percutaneous coronary intervention for individualpatients: development and validation of SYNTAX scoreII.Lancet . 2013;381:639 –650.
6.Takahashi K, Serruys PW, Fuster V, et al. Redevel-
opment and validation of the SYNTAX score II toindividualise decision making between percutaneous
and surgical revascularisation in patients with complex
coronary artery disease: secondary analysis of themulticentre randomised controlled SYNTAXES trialwith external cohort validation. Lancet . 2020;396:
1399 –1412.
7.Généreux P, Palmerini T, Caixeta A, et al. SYNTAX
score reproducibility and variability between inter-ventional cardiologists, core laboratory technicians,
and quantitative coronary measurements. Circ Car-
diovasc Interv . 2011;4:553 –561.
8.Zhang Y-J, Iqbal J, Campos CM, et al. Prognostic
value of site SYNTAX score and rationale for combininganatomic and clinical factors in decision making: in-sights from the SYNTAX trial. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2014;64:423 –432.
4.3. Use of Coronary Physiology to Guide
Revascularization With PCI
1.Tonino PAL, De Bruyne B, Pijls NHJ, et al. Fractional
ﬂow reserve versus angiography for guiding percuta-
neous coronary intervention. N Engl J Med . 2009;360:
213–224.
2.De Bruyne B, Pijls NHJ, Kalesan B, et al. Fractional
ﬂow reserve-guided PCI versus medical therapy in
stable coronary disease. N Engl J Med
. 2012;367:991 –
1001 .
3.De Bruyne B, Fearon WF, Pijls NHJ, et al. Fractional
ﬂow reserve-guided PCI for stable coronary artery
disease. N Engl J Med . 2014;371:1208 –1217.
4.Davies JE, Sen S, Dehbi H-M, et al. Use of the
instantaneous wave-free ratio or fractional ﬂow
reserve in PCI. N Engl J Med . 2017;376:1824 –1834 .5.Xaplanteris P, Fournier S, Pijls NHJ, et al. Five-year
outcomes with PCI guided by fractional ﬂow reserve.
N Engl J Med . 2018;379:250 –259.
6.Götberg M, Christiansen EH, Gudmundsdottir IJ,
et al. Instantaneous wave-free ratio versus fractionalﬂow reserve to guide PCI. N Engl J Med . 2017;376:
1813 –1823 .
7.Zimmermann FM, Ferrara A, Johnson NP, et al.
Deferral vs. performance of percutaneous coronaryintervention of functionally non-signi ﬁcant coronary
stenosis: 15-year follow-up of the DEFER trial. Eur
Heart J . 2015;36:3182 –3188 .
8.Pijls NHJ, van Schaardenburgh P, Manoharan G,
et al. Percutaneous coronary intervention of func-tionally nonsigni ﬁcant stenosis: 5-year follow-up of
the DEFER study. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2007;49:2105 –
2111.
9.Pijls NHJ, Fearon WF, Tonino PAL, et al. Fractional
ﬂow reserve versus angiography for guiding percuta-
neous coronary intervention in patients with multi-vessel coronary artery disease: 2-year follow-up of theFAME (Fractional Flow Reserve Versus Angiography
for Multivessel Evaluation) study. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2010;56:177 –184.
10.Escaned J, Ryan N, Mejía-Rentería H, et al. Safety
of the deferral of coronary revascularization on the
basis of instantaneous wave-free ratio and fractional
ﬂow reserve measurements in stable coronary artery
disease and acute coronary syndromes. J Am Coll
Cardiol Intv . 2018;11:1437 –1449 .
11.Bruno F, D ’Ascenzo F, Marengo G, et al. Fractional
ﬂow reserve guided versus angiographic guided sur-
gical revascularization: a meta-analysis. Catheter Car-
diovasc Interv . 2020;98:e18 –e23.
12.Timbadia D, Ler A, Sazzad F, et al. FFR-guided
versus coronary angiogram-guided CABG: a review and
meta-analysis of prospective randomized controlledtrials. J Card Surg . 2020;35:2785 –2793 .
13.Thuesen AL, Riber LP, Veien KT, et al. Fractional
ﬂow reserve versus angiographically-guided coronary
artery bypass grafting. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2018;72:
2732 –2743 .
14.Toth GG, De Bruyne B, Kala P, et al. Graft patency
after FFR-guided versus angiography-guided coronary
artery bypass grafting: the GRAFFITI trial. Euro-
Intervention . 2019;15:e999 –e1005 .
4.4. Intravascular Ultrasound to Assess Lesion
Severity
1.de la Torre Hernandez JM, Hernandez Hernandez F,
Alfonso F, et al. Prospective application of pre-de ﬁned
intravascular ultrasound criteria for assessment of in-
termediate left main coronary artery lesions resultsfrom the multicenter LITRO study. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2011;58:351 –358.
2.Fassa AA, Wagatsuma K, Higano ST, et al. Intra-
vascular ultrasound-guided treatment for angio-graphically indeterminate left main coronary arterydisease: a long-term follow-up study. J Am Coll Car-
diol. 2005;45:204 –211.
3.Park SJ, Ahn JM, Kang SJ, et al. Intravascular
ultrasound-derived minimal lumen area criteria forfunctionally signi ﬁcant left main coronary artery ste-
nosis. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv . 2014;7:868 –874.
4.Jasti V, Ivan E, Yalamanchili V, et al. Correlations
between fractional ﬂow reserve and intravascularultrasound in patients with an ambiguous left main
coronary artery stenosis. Circulation . 2004;110:2831 –
2836 .
5.Kang SJ, Lee JY, Ahn JM, et al. Intravascular
ultrasound-derived predictors for fractional ﬂow
reserve in intermediate left main disease. J Am Coll
Cardiol Intv . 2011;4:1168 –1174.
6.Waksman R, Legutko J, Singh J, et al. FIRST: Frac-
tional Flow Reserve and Intravascular Ultrasound
Relationship Study. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2013;61:917 –
923.
7.Koo BK, Yang HM, Doh JH, et al. Optimal intravas-
cular ultrasound criteria and their accuracy for de ﬁning
the functional signi ﬁcance of intermediate coronary
stenoses of different locations. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv .
2011;4:803 –811.
8.Kubo T, Akasaka T, Shite J, et al. OCT compared with
IVUS in a coronary lesion assessment: the OPUS-CLASSstudy. J Am Coll Cardiol Img . 2013;6:1095 –1104 .
5.1. Revascularization of the Infarct Artery in
Patients With STEMI
1.Keeley EC, Boura JA, Grines CL. Primary angioplasty
versus intravenous thrombolytic therapy for acutemyocardial infarction: a quantitative review of 23randomised trials. Lancet . 2003;361:13 –20.
2.Zijlstra F, Hoorntje JC, de Boer MJ, et al. Long-term
beneﬁt of primary angioplasty as compared with
thrombolytic therapy for acute myocardial infarction.N Engl J Med . 1999;341:1413 –1419 .
3.Global Use of Strategies to Open Occluded Coronary
Arteries in Acute Coronary Syndromes (GUSTO IIb)
Angioplasty Substudy Investigators. A clinical trial
comparing primary coronary angioplasty with tissueplasminogen activator for acute myocardial infarction.N Engl J Med . 1997;336:1621 –1628 .
4.Andersen HR, Nielsen TT, Rasmussen K, et al.
A comparison of coronary angioplasty with ﬁbrinolytic
therapy in acute myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med .
2003;349:733 –742.
5.Grines CL, Browne KF, Marco J, et al. A comparison
of immediate angioplasty with thrombolytic therapyfor acute myocardial infarction. The Primary Angio-
plasty in Myocardial Infarction Study Group. N Engl J
Med. 1993;328:673 –679.
6.Hochman JS, Sleeper LA, Webb JG, et al. Early
revascularization in acute myocardial infarctioncomplicated by cardiogenic shock. SHOCK In-vestigators. Should We Emergently RevascularizeOccluded Coronaries for Cardiogenic Shock? N Engl J
Med. 1999;341:625 –634.
7.Mehta RH, Lopes RD, Ballotta A, et al. Percutaneous
coronary intervention or coronary artery bypass sur-
gery for cardiogenic shock and multivessel coronary
artery disease? Am Heart J . 2010;159:141 –147.
8.Chevalier P, Burri H, Fahrat F, et al. Perioperative
outcome and long-term survival of surgery for acutepost-infarction mitral regurgitation. Eur J Cardiothorac
Surg. 2004;26:330
–335.
9.Russo A, Suri RM, Grigioni F, et al. Clinical outcome
after surgical correction of mitral regurgitation due to
papillary muscle rupture. Circulation . 2008;118:1528 –
1534 .
10.Gershlick AH, Stephens-Lloyd A, Hughes S, et al.
Rescue angioplasty after failed thrombolytic therapyLawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e98

for acute myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med .
2005;353:2758 –2768 .
11.Sutton AGC, Campbell PG, Graham R, et al.
A randomized trial of rescue angioplasty versus aconservative approach for failed ﬁbrinolysis in ST-
segment elevation myocardial infarction: the Mid-
dlesbrough Early Revascularization to Limit INfarc-
tion (MERLIN) trial. J Am Coll Cardiol .2 0 0 4 ; 4 4 :
287–296.
12.Wijeysundera HC, Vijayaraghavan R,
Nallamothu BK, et al. Rescue angioplasty or repeatﬁbrinolysis after failed ﬁbrinolytic therapy for ST-
segment myocardial infarction: a meta-analysis ofrandomized trials. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2007;49:422 –
430.
13.Collet J-P, Montalescot G, Le May M, et al.
Percutaneous coronary intervention after ﬁbrinolysis: a
multiple meta-analyses approach according to thetype of strategy. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2006;48:1326 –
1335 .
14.Madan M, Halvorsen S, Di Mario C, et al.
Relationship between time to invasive assessmentand clinical outcomes of patients undergoing ane a r l yi n v a s i v es t r a t e g ya f t e r ﬁbrinolysis for ST-
segment elevation myocardial infarction: a
patient-level analysis of the randomized earlyroutine invasive clinical trials. J Am Coll Cardiol
Intv.2 0 1 5 ; 8 : 1 6 6 –174.
15.Cantor WJ, Fitchett D, Borgundvaag B, et al.
Routine early angioplasty after ﬁbrinolysis for acute
myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med . 2009;360:2705 –
2718 .
16.Di Mario C, Dudek D, Piscione F, et al. Immediate
angioplasty versus standard therapy with rescue an-gioplasty after thrombolysis in the Combined Abcix-imab REteplase Stent Study in Acute MyocardialInfarction (CARESS-in-AMI): an open, prospective,
randomised, multicentre trial. Lancet . 2008;371:559 –
568.
17.Borgia F, Goodman SG, Halvorsen S, et al. Early
routine percutaneous coronary intervention afterﬁbrinolysis vs. standard therapy in ST-segment
elevation myocardial infarction: a meta-analysis. Eur
Heart J . 2010;31:2156 –2169 .
18.Armstrong PW, WEST Steering Committee.
A comparison of pharmacologic therapy with/withouttimely coronary intervention vs. primary percutaneousintervention early after ST-elevation myocardial
infarction: the WEST (Which Early ST-elevation
myocardial infarction Therapy) study. Eur Heart J .
2006;27:1530 –1538 .
19.Fernandez-Avilés F, Alonso JJ, Castro-
Beiras A, et al. Routine invasive strategy within
24 hours of thrombolysis versus ischaemia-guidedconservative approach for acute myocardialinfarction with ST-segment elevation (GRACIA-1):
ar a n d o m i s e dc o n t r o l l e dt r i a l . Lancet . 2004;364:
1045 –1053 .
20.Le May MR, Wells GA, Labinaz M, et al. Combined
angioplasty and pharmacological intervention versusthrombolysis alone in acute myocardial infarction(CAPITAL AMI study). J Am Coll Cardiol . 2005;46:417 –
424.
21.Schömig A, Mehilli J, Antoniucci D, et al. Mechan-
ical reperfusion in patients with acute myocardialinfarction presenting more than 12 hours from symp-tom onset: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA .
2005;293:2865 –2872 .22.Gierlotka M, Gasior M, Wilczek K, et al. Reperfusion
by primary percutaneous coronary intervention in pa-tients with ST-segment elevation myocardial infarctionwithin 12 to 24 hours of the onset of symptoms (from a
prospective national observational study [PL-ACS]).
Am J Cardiol . 2011;107:501 –508.
23.Pi Y, Roe MT, Holmes DN, et al. Utilization, char-
acteristics, and in-hospital outcomes of coronary ar-tery bypass grafting in patients with ST-segment-elevation myocardial infarction: results from the Na-tional Cardiovascular Data Registry Acute CoronaryTreatment and Intervention Outcomes Network Reg-
istry —Get With The Guidelines. Circ Cardiovasc Qual
Outcomes . 2017;10:e003490 .
24.Grothusen C, Friedrich C, Loehr J, et al. Outcome
of stable patients with acute myocardial infarction andcoronary artery bypass surgery within 48 hours: asingle-center, retrospective experience. J Am Heart
Assoc . 2017;6:e005498 .
25.Hochman JS, Lamas GA, Buller CE, et al. Coronary
intervention for persistent occlusion after myocardialinfarction. N Engl J Med . 2006;355:2395 –2407 .
26.Steg PG, Thuaire C, Himbert D, et al. DECOPI
(DEsobstruction COronaire en Post-Infarctus): a ran-
domized multi-centre trial of occluded artery angio-
plasty after acute myocardial infarction. Eur Heart J .
2004;25:2187 –2194 .
27.Mehta RH, Grab JD, O ’Brien SM, et al. Clinical
characteristics and in-hospital outcomes of patientswith cardiogenic shock undergoing coronary arterybypass surgery: insights from the Society of ThoracicSurgeons National Cardiac Database. Circulation .
2008;117:876 –885.
28.Acharya D, Gulack BC, Loyaga-Rendon RY, et al.
Clinical characteristics and outcomes of patients withmyocardial infarction and cardiogenic shock undergo-ing coronary artery bypass surgery: data from theSociety of Thoracic Surgeons National Database. Ann
Thorac Surg . 2016;101:558 –566.
29.Santarpino G, Ruggieri VG, Mariscalco G, et al.
Outcome in patients having salvage coronary artery
bypass grafting. Am J Cardiol . 2015;116:1193 –1198 .
30.
Pinto DS, Kirtane AJ, Nallamothu BK, et al. Hos-
pital delays in reperfusion for ST-elevation myocardial
infarction: implications when selecting a reperfusionstrategy. Circulation . 2006;114:2019 –2025 .
31.Armstrong PW, Gershlick AH, Goldstein P, et al.
Fibrinolysis or primary PCI in ST-segment elevationmyocardial infarction. N Engl J Med .2 0 1 3 ; 3 6 8 : 1 3 7 9 –1387 .
32.Braxton JH, Hammond GL, Letsou GV, et al.
Optimal timing of coronary artery bypass graft surgeryafter acute myocardial infarction. Circulation . 1995;92:
II66 –II68.
33.Tavakoli R, Weber A, Brunner-La Rocca H, et al.
Results of surgery for irreversible moderate to se-
vere mitral valve regurgitation secondary tomyocardial infarction. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg .
2002;21:818 –824.
34.Shamshad F, Kenchaiah S, Finn PV, et al. Fatal
myocardial rupture after acute myocardial infarctioncomplicated by heart failure, left ventricular dysfunction,or both: the VALsartan In Acute myocardial iNfarcTion
Trial (VALIANT). Am Heart J . 2010;160:145 –151.
35.Schroeter T, Lehmann S, Misfeld M, et al. Clinical
outcome after mitral valve surgery due to ischemicpapillary muscle rupture. Ann Thorac Surg . 2013;95:
820 –824.36.Arnaoutakis GJ, Zhao Y, George TJ, et al. Surgical
repair of ventricular septal defect after myocardialinfarction: outcomes from the Society of ThoracicSurgeons National Database. Ann Thorac Surg .
2012;94:436 –443. discussion 43-4 .
37.Singh V, Rodriguez AP, Bhatt P, et al. Ventricular
septal defect complicating ST-elevation myocardialinfarctions: a call for action. Am J Med . 2017;130:863.
e1–863.e12 .
38.Lanz J, Wyss D, Räber L, et al. Mechanical com-
plications in patients with ST-segment elevationmyocardial infarction: a single centre experience. PLoS
One. 2019;14:e0209502 .
39.Wan Y-D, Sun T-W, Kan Q-C, et al. The effects of
intra-aortic balloon pumps on mortality in patients
undergoing high-risk coronary revascularization: a
meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials of cor-onary artery bypass grafting and stenting era. PLoS
One. 2016;11:e0147291 .
40.Kettner J, Sramko M, Holek M, et al. Utility of
intra-aortic balloon pump support for ventricularseptal rupture and acute mitral regurgitation compli-cating acute myocardial infarction. Am J Cardiol .
2013;112:1709 –1713.
41.Mason PJ, Shah B, Tamis-Holland JE, et al. An
update on radial artery access and best practices fortransradial coronary angiography and intervention inacute coronary syndrome: a scienti ﬁc statement from
the American Heart Association. Circ Cardiovasc Interv .
2018;11:e000035 .
42.D’Souza SP, Mamas MA, Fraser DG, et al. Routine
early coronary angioplasty versus ischaemia-guidedangioplasty after thrombolysis in acute ST-elevation
myocardial infarction: a meta-analysis. Eur Heart J .
2011;32:972 –982.
43.Ndrepepa G, Kastrati A, Mehilli J, et al. Mechanical
reperfusion and long-term mortality in patients with
acute myocardial infarction presenting 12 to 48 hours
from onset of symptoms. JAMA . 2009;301:487 –488.
5.2. Revascularization of the Non-Infarct Artery
in Patients With STEMI
1.Politi L, Sgura F, Rossi R, et al. A randomised trial of
target-vessel versus multi-vessel revascularisation inST-elevation myocardial infarction: major adversecardiac events during long-term follow-up. Heart .
2010;96:662 –667.
2.Gershlick AH, Khan JN, Kelly DJ, et al. Randomized
trial of complete versus lesion-only revascularizationin patients undergoing primary percutaneous coronaryintervention for STEMI and multivessel disease: the
CvLPRIT trial. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2015;65:963 –972.
3.Engstrom T, Kelbaek H, Helqvist S, et al. Complete
revascularisation versus treatment of the culprit lesiononly in patients with ST-segment elevation myocardial
infarction and multivessel disease (DANAMI-3-
PRIMULTI): an open-label, randomised controlledtrial. Lancet . 2015;386:665 –671.
4.Mehta SR, Wood DA, Storey RF, et al. Complete
revascularization with multivessel PCI for myocardial
infarction. N Engl J Med . 2019;381:1411 –1421.
5.Di Mario C, Mara S, Flavio A, et al. Single vs multi-
vessel treatment during primary angioplasty: results of
the multicentre randomised HEpacoat for cuLPrit or
multivessel stenting for Acute Myocardial InfarctionJACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee99

(HELP AMI) Study. Int J Cardiovasc Intervent . 2004;6:
128–133.
6.Wald DS, Morris JK, Wald NJ, et al. Randomized trial
of preventive angioplasty in myocardial infarction.N Engl J Med . 2013;369:1115 –1123.
7.Smits PC, Abdel-Wahab M, Neumann FJ, et al.
Fractional ﬂow reserve-guided multivessel angioplasty
in myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med . 2017;376:1234 –
1244 .
8.Thiele H, Akin I, Sandri M, et al. PCI strategies in
patients with acute myocardial infarction and cardio-genic shock. N Engl J Med . 2017;377:2419 –2432 .
9.Thiele H, Akin I, Sandri M, et al. One-year outcomes
after PCI strategies in cardiogenic shock. N Engl J Med .
2018;379:1699 –1710 .
10.Kolte D, Sardar P, Khera S, et al. Culprit vessel-only
versus multivessel percutaneous coronary intervention
in patients with cardiogenic shock complicating ST-segment-elevation myocardial infarction: a collabora-tive meta-analysis. Circ Cardiovasc Interv . 2017;10:
e005582 .
11.Bates ER, Tamis-Holland JE, Bittl JA, et al. PCI
strategies in patients with ST-segment elevation
myocardial infarction and multivessel coronary artery
disease. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2016;68:1066 –1081 .
12.Wood DA, Cairns JA, Wang J, et al. Timing of
staged nonculprit artery revascularization in patientswith ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction:COMPLETE Trial. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;74:2713 –
2723 .
13.Dehmer GJ, Badhwar V, Bermudez EA, et al. 2020
AHA/ACC key data elements and de ﬁnitions for coro-
nary revascularization: a report of the American Col-
lege of Cardiology/American Heart Association TaskForce on Clinical Data Standards (Writing Committeeto Develop Clinical Data Standards for CoronaryRevascularization). J Am Coll Cardiol . 2020;75:1975 –
2088 .
14.STS. ACSD Training Manual. 2019. Accessed March
30, 2021. Available at https://www.sts.org/sites/
default/ ﬁles/ACSD_TrainingManualV2-9_July2019.pdf
15.Eagle KA, Guyton RA, Davidoff R, et al. ACC/AHA
2004 guideline update for coronary artery bypassgraft surgery: a report of the American College ofCardiology/American Heart Association Task Force onPractice Guidelines (Committee to Update the 1999Guidelines for Coronary Artery Bypass Graft Surgery). J
Am Coll Cardiol. 2004;44:e213 –e311.
6.1. Coronary Angiography and Revasculariza-
tion in Patients With NSTE-ACS
1.Cannon CP, Weintraub WS, Demopoulos LA, et al.
Comparison of early invasive and conservative strate-
gies in patients with unstable coronary syndromes
treated with the glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitor tir-
oﬁban. N Engl J Med . 2001;344:1879 –1887 .
2.Fox KA, Poole-Wilson PA, Henderson RA, et al.
Interventional versus conservative treatment for pa-tients with unstable angina or non-ST-elevationmyocardial infarction: the British Heart FoundationRITA 3 randomised trial. Randomized Intervention Trial
of unstable Angina. Lancet . 2002;360:743 –751.
3.Invasive compared with non-invasive treatment in
unstable coronary-artery disease: FRISC II prospectiverandomised multicentre study. FRagmin and FastRevascularisation during InStability in Coronary artery
disease Investigators. Lancet . 1999;354:708 –715.
4.Mehta SR, Cannon CP, Fox KAA, et al. Routine vs
selective invasive strategies in patients with acutecoronary syndromes: a collaborative meta-analysis ofrandomized trials. JAMA . 2005;293:2908 –2917 .
5.Liakopoulos OJ, Schlachtenberger G, Wendt D, et al.
Early clinical outcomes of surgical myocardial revas-
cularization for acute coronary syndromes complicatedby cardiogenic shock: a report from the North-Rhine-Westphalia Surgical Myocardial Infarction Registry.J Am Heart Assoc . 2019;8:e012049 .
6.Acharya D, Gulack BC, Loyaga-Rendon RY, et al.
Clinical characteristics and outcomes of patients withmyocardial infarction and cardiogenic shock undergo-ing coronary artery bypass surgery: data from the
Society of Thoracic Surgeons National Database. Ann
Thorac Surg . 2016;101:558 –566.
7.Mehta RH, Grab JD, O ’Brien SM, et al. Clinical
characteristics and in-hospital outcomes of patientswith cardiogenic shock undergoing coronary arterybypass surgery: insights from the Society of ThoracicSurgeons National Cardiac Database. Circulation .
2008;117:876 –885.
8.White HD, Assmann SF, Sanborn TA, et al. Com-
parison of percutaneous coronary intervention and
coronary artery bypass grafting after acute myocardialinfarction complicated by cardiogenic shock: resultsfrom the Should We Emergently RevascularizeOccluded Coronaries for Cardiogenic Shock (SHOCK)trial. Circulation . 2005;112:1992 –2001 .
9.Hochman JS, Sleeper LA, Webb JG, et al. Early
revascularization in acute myocardial infarction
complicated by cardiogenic shock. SHOCK In-
vestigators. Should we emergently revascularizeoccluded coronaries for cardiogenic shock? N Engl J
Med. 1999;341:625 –634.
10.Kolte D, Khera S, Dabhadkar KC, et al. Trends in
coronary angiography, revascularization, and out-comes of cardiogenic shock complicating non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction. Am J Cardiol .
2016;117:1 –9.
11.Jobs A, Mehta SR, Montalescot G, et al. Optimal
timing of an invasive strategy in patients with non-ST-
elevation acute coronary syndrome: a meta-analysis ofrandomised trials. Lancet . 2017;390:737 –746
.
12.Kofoed KF, Kelbæk H, Hansen PR, et al. Early
versus standard care invasive examination and treat-ment of patients with non-ST-segment elevation acutecoronary syndrome. Circulation . 2018;138:2741 –2750 .
13.Milosevic A, Vasiljevic-Pokrajcic Z, Milasinovic D,
et al. Immediate versus delayed invasive interventionfor non-STEMI patients: the RIDDLE-NSTEMI study. J
Am Coll Cardiol Intv . 2016;9:541 –549.
14.Reuter P-G, Rouchy C, Cattan S, et al. Early inva-
sive strategy in high-risk acute coronary syndromewithout ST-segment elevation. The Sisca randomizedtrial. Int J Cardiol . 2015;182:414 –418.
15.Deharo P, Ducrocq G, Bode C, et al. Timing of
angiography and outcomes in high-risk patients withnon-ST-segment-elevation myocardial infarctionmanaged invasively: insights from the TAO trial(Treatment of Acute Coronary Syndrome With Ota-
mixaban). Circulation . 2017;136:1895 –1907 .
16.Mehta SR, Granger CB, Boden WE, et al. Early
versus delayed invasive intervention in acute coronary
syndromes. N Engl J Med . 2009;360:2165 –2175 .17.Axelsson TA, Mennander A, Malmberg M, et al. Is
emergency and salvage coronary artery bypass graft-ing justi ﬁed? The Nordic Emergency/Salvage Coronary
Artery Bypass Grafting study. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg .
2016;49:1451 –1456 .
18.Thiele H, Akin I, Sandri M, et al. PCI strategies in
patients with acute myocardial infarction and cardio-
genic shock. N Engl J Med . 2017;377:2419 –2432 .
19.Thiele H, Akin I, Sandri M, et al. One-year outcomes
after PCI strategies in cardiogenic shock. N Engl J Med .
2018;379:1699 –1710 .
20.Qayyum R, Khalid MR, Adomaityte J, et al. Sys-
tematic review: comparing routine and selective inva-sive strategies for the acute coronary syndrome. Ann
Intern Med . 2008;148:186 –196.
21.Fox KAA, Clayton TC, Damman P, et al. Long-term
outcome of a routine versus selective invasive strategy
in patients with non-ST-segment elevation acute cor-
onary syndrome a meta-analysis of individual patientdata. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2010;55:2435 –2445 .
22.de Araújo Gonçalves P, Ferreira J, Aguiar C, et al.
TIMI, PURSUIT, and GRACE risk scores: sustainedprognostic value and interaction with revascularizationin NSTE-ACS. Eur Heart J . 2005;26:865 –872.
23.Fox KAA, Fitzgerald G, Puymirat E, et al. Should
patients with acute coronary disease be strati ﬁed for
management according to their risk? Derivation,
external validation and outcomes using the updated
GRACE risk score. BMJ Open . 2014;4:e004425 .
24.Global Registry of Acute Coronary Events
(GRACE). The GRACE ACS Risk Score Calculator 2.0 ;
2021. Accessed June 9, 2021. Available at https://
www.outcomes-umassmed.org/grace/acs_risk2/index.html
25.TIMI Study Group. TIMI Risk Score Calculator for
UA/NSTEMI ; 2020. Accessed June 9, 2021. Available at
https://timi.org/calculators/timi-risk-score-
calculator-for-ua-nstemi/
26.Antman EM, Cohen M, Bernink PJ, et al. The TIMI
risk score for unstable angina/non-ST elevation MI: amethod for prognostication and therapeutic decisionmaking. JAMA . 2000;284:835 –842.
27.Wan Y-D, Sun T-W, Kan Q-C, et al. The effects of
intra-aortic balloon pumps on mortality in patientsundergoing high-risk coronary revascularization: a
meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials of cor-
onary artery bypass grafting and stenting era. PLoS
One. 2016;11:e0147291 .
28.Awan A, Ogunti R, Fatima U, et al. Timing of
percutaneous coronary intervention in non-ST eleva-tion acute coronary syndrome —meta-analysis and
systematic review of literature. Cardiovasc Revasc Med .
2020;21:1398 –1404 .
29.Badings EA, The SHK, Dambrink J-HE, et al. Early
or late intervention in high-risk non-ST-elevation
acute coronary syndromes: results of the ELISA-3 trial.EuroIntervention . 2013;9:54 –61.
30.Navarese EP, Gurbel PA, Andreotti F, et al. Optimal
timing of coronary invasive strategy in non-ST-segment elevation acute coronary syndromes: a sys-tematic review and meta-analysis. Ann Intern Med .
2013;158:261 –270.
31.Gore J, Fox KAA. GRACE ACS Risk and Mortality
Calculator . 2021. Accessed September 20, 2019.
Available at https://www.mdcalc.com/grace-acs-risk-
mortality-calculatorLawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e100

7.1. Revascularization to Improve Survival in
SIHD Compared With Medical Therapy
1.Velazquez EJ, Lee KL, Jones RH, et al. Coronary-
artery bypass surgery in patients with ischemic car-
diomyopathy. N Engl J Med . 2016;374:1511 –1520 .
2.Gaudino M, Hameed I, Khan FM, et al. Treatment
strategies in ischaemic left ventricular dysfunction: anetwork meta-analysis. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg .
2021;59:293 –301.
3.Coronary artery surgery study (CASS): a randomized
trial of coronary artery bypass surgery: survival data.Circulation . 1983;68:939 –950.
4.Marui A, Kimura T, Nishiwaki N, et al. Comparison
ofﬁve-year outcomes of coronary artery bypass
grafting versus percutaneous coronary intervention
in patients with left ventricular ejection fractions
#50% versus >50% (from the CREDO-Kyoto PCI/
CABG Registry Cohort-2). Am J Cardiol . 2014;114:988 –
996.
5.Zhang D, Lyu S, Song X, et al. Coronary artery
bypass grafting versus percutaneous coronary inter-vention in patients with left ventricular systolicdysfunction: a meta-analysis. Angiology . 2017;68:19 –
28.
6.Orlandini A, Castellana N, Pascual A, et al.
Myocardial viability for decision-making concerningrevascularization in patients with left ventriculardysfunction and coronary artery disease: a meta-analysis of non-randomized and randomized studies.Int J Cardiol . 2015;182:494 –499.
7.Wolff G, Dimitroulis D, Andreotti F, et al. Survival
beneﬁts of invasive versus conservative strategies in
heart failure in patients with reduced ejection fraction
and coronary artery disease: a meta-analysis. Circ
Heart Fail . 2017;10:e003255 .
8.Passamani E, Davis KB, Gillespie MJ, et al.
A randomized trial of coronary artery bypass surgery:survival of patients with a low ejection fraction. N Engl
J Med . 1985;312:1665 –1671.
9.Bittl JA, He Y, Jacobs AK, et al. Bayesian methods
afﬁrm the use of percutaneous coronary intervention
to improve survival in patients with unprotected left
main coronary artery disease. Circulation . 2013;127:
2177 –2185 .
10.Yusuf S, Zucker D, Peduzzi P, et al. Effect of cor-
onary artery bypass graft surgery on survival: overviewof 10-year results from randomised trials by the Cor-onary Artery Bypass Graft Surgery Trialists Collabora-
tion. Lancet . 1994;344:563 –570.
11.Takaro T, Peduzzi P, Detre KM, et al. Survival in
subgroups of patients with left main coronary artery
disease. Veterans Administration Cooperative Study ofSurgery for Coronary Arterial Occlusive Disease. Cir-
culation . 1982;66:14 –22.
12.Talano JV, Scanlon PJ, Meadows WR, et al. In ﬂu-
ence of surgery on survival in 145 patients with leftmain coronary artery disease. Circulation .
1975;52(suppl 2):I-105 –I-111.
13.Long-term results of prospective randomised study
of coronary artery bypass surgery in stable anginapectoris. European Coronary Surgery Study Group.Lancet . 1982;2:1173 –1180 .
14.Maron DJ, Hochman JS, Reynolds HR, et al. Initial
invasive or conservative strategy for stable coronarydisease. N Engl J Med . 2020;382:1395 –1407 .15.Bangalore S, Maron DJ, Stone GW, et al. Routine
revascularization versus initial medical therapy forstable ischemic heart disease: a systematic review andmeta-analysis of randomized trials. Circulation .
2020;142:841 –857.
16.Chacko L, P Howard J, Rajkumar C, et al. Effects of
percutaneous coronary intervention on death and
myocardial infarction strati ﬁed by stable and unstable
coronary artery disease: a meta-analysis of randomizedcontrolled trials. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes .
2020;13:e006363 .
17.Boden WE, O ’Rourke RA, Teo KK, et al. Optimal
medical therapy with or without PCI for stable coro-nary disease. N Engl J Med . 2007;356:1503 –1516.
18.Sedlis SP, Hartigan PM, Teo KK, et al. Effect of PCI
on long-term survival in patients with stable ischemicheart disease. N Engl J Med . 2015;373:1937 –1946 .
19.Hueb W, Soares PR, Gersh BJ, et al. The medicine,
angioplasty, or surgery study (MASS-II): a randomized,
controlled clinical trial of three therapeutic strategies
for multivessel coronary artery disease: one-year re-sults. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2004;43:1743 –1751.
20.Hueb W, Lopes N, Gersh BJ, et al. Ten-year follow-
up survival of the Medicine, Angioplasty, or SurgeryStudy (MASS II): a randomized controlled clinical trialof 3 therapeutic strategies for multivessel coronaryartery disease. Circulation . 2010;122:949 –957.
21.Hueb W, Lopes NH, Gersh BJ, et al. Five-year
follow-up of the Medicine, Angioplasty, or SurgeryStudy (MASS II): a randomized controlled clinical trial
of 3 therapeutic strategies for multivessel coronary
artery disease. Circulation . 2007;115:1082 –1089
.
22.TIME Investigators. Trial of invasive versus medical
therapy in elderly patients with chronic symptomaticcoronary-artery disease (TIME): a randomised trial.Lancet . 2001;358:951 –957.
23.Pitt B, Waters D, Brown WV, et al. Aggressive lipid-
lowering therapy compared with angioplasty in stablecoronary artery disease. Atorvastatin versus Revascu-larization Treatment Investigators. N Engl J Med .
1999;341:70 –76.
24.Chaitman BR, Hardison RM, Adler D, et al. The
Bypass Angioplasty Revascularization Investigation 2
Diabetes randomized trial of different treatment stra-tegies in type 2 diabetes mellitus with stable ischemicheart disease: impact of treatment strategy on cardiacmortality and myocardial infarction. Circulation .
2009;120:2529 –2540 .
25.Kapoor JR, Gienger AL, Ardehali R, et al. Isolated
disease of the proximal left anterior descending arterycomparing the effectiveness of percutaneous coronary
interventions and coronary artery bypass surgery. JA m
Coll Cardiol Intv . 2008;1:483 –491.
26.Jones RH, Kesler K, Phillips HR 3rd, et al. Long-
term survival bene ﬁts of coronary artery bypass
grafting and percutaneous transluminal angioplasty inpatients with coronary artery disease. J Thorac Car-
diovasc Surg . 1996;111:1013 –1025 .
27.Aziz O, Rao C, Panesar SS, et al. Meta-analysis of
minimally invasive internal thoracic artery bypassversus percutaneous revascularisation for isolated le-
sions of the left anterior descending artery. BMJ.
2007;334:617 .
28.Hannan EL, Samadashvili Z, Cozzens K, et al.
Comparative outcomes for patients who do and do notundergo percutaneous coronary intervention for stablecoronary artery disease in New York. Circulation .
2012;125:1870 –1879 .
29.Smith PK, Califf RM, Tuttle RH, et al. Selection of
surgical or percutaneous coronary intervention pro-vides differential longevity bene ﬁt.Ann Thorac Surg .
2006;82:1420 –1428. discussion 8-9 .
30.Pijls NHJ, van Schaardenburgh P, Manoharan G,
et al. Percutaneous coronary intervention of func-
tionally nonsigni ﬁcant stenosis: 5-year follow-up of
the DEFER study. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2007;49:2105 –
2111.
31.Hamad MAS, van Straten AHM, Schönberger JPAM,
et al. Preoperative ejection fraction as a predictor ofsurvival after coronary artery bypass grafting: com-parison with a matched general population.J Cardiothorac Surg . 2010;5:29 .
32.Jiang L, Xu L, Song L, et al. Comparison of three
treatment strategies for patients with triple-vessel
coronary disease and left ventricular dysfunction.J Interv Cardiol . 2018;31:310 –
318.
33.Uyar IS, Sahin V, Akpinar MB, et al. Decision making
and results of coronary artery bypass grafting for pa-tients with poor left ventricular function. Heart Surg
Forum . 2013;16:E118 –E124 .
34.Katritsis DG, Ioannidis JPA. Percutaneous coronary
intervention versus conservative therapy in nonacutecoronary artery disease: a meta-analysis. Circulation .
2005;111:2906 –2912 .
35.Doenst T, Haverich A, Serruys P, et al. PCI and
CABG for treating stable coronary artery disease: JACCreview topic of the week. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;73:
964 –976.
36.Stergiopoulos K, Brown DL. Initial coronary stent
implantation with medical therapy vs medical therapyalone for stable coronary artery disease: meta-analysisof randomized controlled trials. Arch Intern Med .
2012;172:312 –319.
37.Windecker S, Stortecky S, Stefanini GG, et al.
Revascularisation versus medical treatment in patients
with stable coronary artery disease: network meta-analysis. BMJ. 2014;348:g3859 .
38.Group BDS, Frye RL, August P, et al. A randomized
trial of therapies for type 2 diabetes and coronary ar-tery disease. N Engl J Med . 2009;360:2503 –2515 .
39.Velazquez EJ, Lee KL, Deja MA, et al. Coronary-
artery bypass surgery in patients with left ventriculardysfunction. N Engl J Med . 2011;364:1607 –1616 .
40.Petrie MC, Jhund PS, She L, et al. Ten-year outcomes
after coronary artery bypass grafting according to age in
patients with heart failure and left ventricular systolic
dysfunction: an analysis of the extended follow-up ofthe STICH trial (Surgical Treatment for Ischemic HeartFailure). Circulation . 2016;134:1314 –1324 .
41.Bonow RO, Maurer G, Lee KL, et al. Myocardial
viability and survival in ischemic left ventriculardysfunction. N Engl J Med . 2011;364:1617 –1625 .
42.Veterans Administration Coronary Artery Bypass
Surgery Cooperative Study Group. Eleven-year survivalin the Veterans Administration randomized trial of
coronary bypass surgery for stable angina. N Engl J
Med. 1984;311:1333 –1339 .
43.Murphy ML, Hultgren HN, Detre K, et al. Treat-
ment of chronic stable angina. A preliminary report ofsurvival data of the randomized Veterans Administra-tion cooperative study. N Engl J Med . 1977;297:621 –
627.JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee101

44.Varnauskas E. Twelve-year follow-up of survival in
the randomized European Coronary Surgery Study.N Engl J Med . 1988;319:332 –337.
45.Mathur VS, Guinn GA. Prospective randomized
study of the surgical therapy of stable angina. Car-
diovasc Clin . 1977;8:131 –144.
46.Chaitman BR, Fisher LD, Bourassa MG, et al. Effect
of coronary bypass surgery on survival patterns insubsets of patients with left main coronary arterydisease: report of the Collaborative Study in CoronaryArtery Surgery (CASS). Am J Cardiol . 1981;48:765 –777.
47.Lee PH, Ahn J-M, Chang M, et al. Left main coro-
nary artery disease: secular trends in patient charac-teristics, treatments, and outcomes. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2016;68:1233 –1246 .
48.Dzavik V, Ghali WA, Norris C, et al. Long-term
survival in 11,661 patients with multivessel coronaryartery disease in the era of stenting: a report from theAlberta Provincial Project for Outcome Assessment inCoronary Heart Disease (APPROACH) Investigators. Am
Heart J . 2001;142:119 –126.
49.Morice M-C, Serruys PW, Kappetein AP, et al. Five-
year outcomes in patients with left main diseasetreated with either percutaneous coronary interven-
tion or coronary artery bypass grafting in the synergy
between percutaneous coronary intervention withtaxus and cardiac surgery trial. Circulation . 2014;129:
2388 –2394 .
50.Mäkikallio T, Holm NR, Lindsay M, et al. Percuta-
neous coronary angioplasty versus coronary arterybypass grafting in treatment of unprotected left mainstenosis (NOBLE): a prospective, randomised, open-label, non-inferiority trial. Lancet . 2016;388:2743 –
2752 .
51.Holm NR, Mäkikallio T, Lindsay MM, et al. Percu-
taneous coronary angioplasty versus coronary arterybypass grafting in the treatment of unprotected leftmain stenosis: updated 5-year outcomes from the
randomised, non-inferiority NOBLE trial. Lancet .
2020;395:191 –199.
52.Kuno T, Ueyama H, Rao SV, et al. Percutaneous
coronary intervention or coronary artery bypass graft
surgery for left main coronary artery disease: a meta-
analysis of randomized trials. Am Heart J . 2020;227:
9–10.
53.Park D-W, Ahn J-M, Park H, et al. Ten-year out-
comes after drug-eluting stents versus coronary artery
bypass grafting for left main coronary disease:extended follow-up of the PRECOMBAT trial. Circula-
tion. 2020;141:1437 –1446 .
54.Ahmad Y, Howard JP, Arnold AD, et al. Mortality
after drug-eluting stents vs. coronary artery bypassgrafting for left main coronary artery disease: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Eur Heart J .
2020;41:3228 –3235 .
55.Gallo M, Blitzer D, Laforgia PL, et al. Percutaneous
coronary intervention versus coronary artery bypassgraft for left main coronary artery disease: a meta-analysis. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2020. S0022-
5223(20)30888-6 .
56.Hillis LD, Smith PK, Anderson JL, et al. 2011 ACCF/
AHA guideline for coronary artery bypass graft sur-gery: a report of the American College of CardiologyFoundation/American Heart Association Task Force on
Practice Guidelines. Developed in collaboration with
the American Association for Thoracic Surgery, Societyof Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists, and Society ofThoracic Surgeons. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2011;58:e123 –
e210 .
57.Myers WO, Schaff HV, Gersh BJ, et al. Improved
survival of surgically treated patients with triple vesselcoronary artery disease and severe angina pectoris: areport from the Coronary Artery Surgery Study (CASS)
registry. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 1989;97:487 –495.
58.Collins R, Reith C, Emberson J, et al. Interpretation
of the evidence for the ef ﬁcacy and safety of statin
therapy. Lancet . 2016;388:2532 –2561 .
59.Levine GN, Bates ER, Bittl JA, et al. 2016 ACC/AHA
guideline focused update on duration of dual anti-platelet therapy in patients with coronary artery dis-ease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on ClinicalPractice Guidelines: an update of the 2011 ACCF/AHA/
SCAI guideline for percutaneous coronary intervention,
2011 ACCF/AHA guideline for coronary artery bypassgraft surgery, 2012 ACC/AHA/ACP/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS guideline for the diagnosis and management ofpatients with stable ischemic heart disease, 2013ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of ST-
elevation myocardial infarction, 2014 AHA/ACC
guideline for the management of patients with non-ST-elevation acute coronary syndromes, and 2014ACC/AHA guideline on perioperative cardiovascularevaluation and management of patients undergoingnoncardiac surgery. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2016;68:1082 –
1115.
60.Navarese EP, Lansky AJ, Kereiakes DJ, et al. Car-
diac mortality in patients randomised to elective cor-
onary revascularisation plus medical therapy ormedical therapy alone: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur Heart J . 2021:ehab246. https://doi.org/
10.1093/eurheartj/ehab246 . Online ahead of print May
18, 2021.
61.Vij A, Kassab K, Chawla H, et al. Invasive therapy
versus conservative therapy for patients with stable
coronary artery disease: an updated meta-analysis.
Clin Cardiol . 2021;44:675 –682.
62.Laukkanen JA, Kunutsor SK. Revascularization
versus medical therapy for the treatment of stablecoronary artery disease: a meta-analysis of contem-porary randomized controlled trials. Int J Cardiol .
2021;324:13 –21.
63.Brooks MM, Chaitman BR, Nesto RW, et al.
Clinical and angiographic risk strati ﬁcation and dif-
ferential impact on treatment outcomes in the
Bypass Angioplasty Revascularization Investigation 2
Diabetes (BARI 2D) trial. Circulation . 2012;126:2115 –
2124 .
64.Hueb WA, Bellotti G, de Oliveira SA, et al. The
Medicine, Angioplasty or Surgery Study (MASS): aprospective, randomized trial of medical therapy,balloon angioplasty or bypass surgery for singleproximal left anterior descending artery stenoses.
J Am Coll Cardiol . 1995;26:1600 –1605 .
65.Hueb WA, Soares PR, Almeida De Oliveira S, et al.
Five-year follow-up of the medicine, angioplasty, or
surgery study (MASS): a prospective, randomized trialof medical therapy, balloon angioplasty, or bypasssurgery for single proximal left anterior descendingcoronary artery stenosis. Circulation . 1999;100:II-107 –
II-113 .
66.Cashin WL, Sanmarco ME, Nessim SA, et al.
Accelerated progression of atherosclerosis in coronary
vessels with minimal lesions that are bypassed. N Engl
J Med . 1984;311:824 –828.67.Pijls NHJ, Fearon WF, Tonino PAL, et al. Fractional
ﬂow reserve versus angiography for guiding percuta-
neous coronary intervention in patients with multi-vessel coronary artery disease: 2-year follow-up of the
FAME (Fractional Flow Reserve Versus Angiography
for Multivessel Evaluation) study. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2010;56:177 –184.
68.Escaned J, Ryan N, Mejía-Rentería H, et al. Safety
of the deferral of coronary revascularization on thebasis of instantaneous wave-free ratio and fractional
ﬂow reserve measurements in stable coronary artery
disease and acute coronary syndromes. J Am Coll
Cardiol Intv . 2018;11:1437 –1449 .
69.Zimmermann FM, Ferrara A, Johnson NP, et al.
Deferral vs. performance of percutaneous coronaryintervention of functionally non-signi ﬁcant coronary
stenosis: 15-year follow-up of the DEFER trial. Eur
Heart J . 2015;36:3182 –3188 .
7.2. Revascularization to Reduce Cardiovascular
Events in SIHD Compared With Medical Therapy
1.Maron DJ, Hochman JS, Reynolds HR, et al. Initial
invasive or conservative strategy for stable coronarydisease. N Engl J Med . 2020;382:1395 –1407 .
2.Hueb W, Lopes N, Gersh BJ, et al. Ten-year
follow-up survival of the Medicine, Angioplasty, orSurgery Study (MASS II): a randomized controlledclinical trial of 3 therapeutic strategies for multivesselcoronary artery disease. Circulation . 2010;122:949 –
957.
3.Navarese EP, Lansky AJ, Kereiakes DJ, et al. Cardiac
mortality in patients randomised to elective coronaryrevascularisation plus medical therapy or medicaltherapy alone: a systematic review and meta-analysis.Eur Heart J . 2021:ehab246. https://doi.org/10.1093/
eurheartj/ehab246 . Online ahead of print May 18,
2021.
4.Chaitman BR, Alexander KP, Cyr DD, et al.
Myocardial infarction in the ISCHEMIA Trial: impact ofdifferent de ﬁnitions on incidence, prognosis, and
treatment comparisons. Circulation . 2021;143:790 –
804.
5.De Bruyne B, Fearon WF, Pijls NHJ, et al. Fractional
ﬂow reserve-guided PCI for stable coronary artery
disease. N Engl J Med . 2014;371:1208 –1217.
6.De Bruyne B, Pijls NHJ, Kalesan B, et al. Fractional
ﬂow reserve-guided PCI versus medical therapy in
stable coronary disease. N Engl J Med . 2012;367:991 –
1001 .
7.Laukkanen JA, Kunutsor SK. Revascularization
versus medical therapy for the treatment of stablecoronary artery disease: a meta-analysis of contem-
porary randomized controlled trials. Int J Cardiol .
2021;324:13 –21.
8.Vij A, Kassab K, Chawla H, et al. Invasive therapy
versus conservative therapy for patients with stablecoronary artery disease: an updated meta-analysis.Clin Cardiol . 2021;44:675 –682.
9.Windecker S, Stortecky S, Stefanini GG, et al.
Revascularisation versus medical treatment in patientswith stable coronary artery disease: network meta-analysis. BMJ. 2014;348:g3859 .
10.Chacko L, P Howard J, Rajkumar C, et al. Effects of
percutaneous coronary intervention on death and
myocardial infarction strati ﬁed by stable and unstable
coronary artery disease: a meta-analysis of randomizedLawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e102

controlled trials. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes .
2020;13:e006363 .
11.Bangalore S, Maron DJ, Stone GW, et al. Routine
revascularization versus initial medical therapy forstable ischemic heart disease: a systematic review andmeta-analysis of randomized trials. Circulation .
2020;142:841 –857.
12.Doenst T, Haverich A, Serruys P, et al. PCI and
CABG for treating stable coronary artery disease: JACCreview topic of the week. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;73:
964 –976.
13.Thygesen K, Alpert JS, Jaffe AS, et al. Fourth uni-
versal de ﬁnition of myocardial infarction (2018). JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2018;72:2231 –2264 .
7.3. Revascularization to Improve Symptoms
1.Spertus JA, Jones PG, Maron DJ, et al. Health-status
outcomes with invasive or conservative care in coro-
nary disease. N Engl J Med . 2020;382:1408 –1419 .
2.Nishigaki K, Yamazaki T, Kitabatake A, et al. Percu-
taneous coronary intervention plus medical therapyreduces the incidence of acute coronary syndromemore effectively than initial medical therapy onlyamong patients with low-risk coronary artery disease arandomized, comparative, multicenter study. J Am Coll
Cardiol Intv . 2008;1:469 –479.
3.Fearon WF, Nishi T, De Bruyne B, et al. Clinical
outcomes and cost-effectiveness of fractional ﬂow
reserve-guided percutaneous coronary intervention inpatients with stable coronary artery disease: three-year follow-up of the FAME 2 trial (Fractional FlowReserve Versus Angiography for Multivessel Evalua-tion). Circulation . 2018;137:480 –487.
4.Abdallah MS, Wang K, Magnuson EA, et al. Quality
of life after PCI vs CABG among patients with diabetes
and multivessel coronary artery disease: a randomized
clinical trial. JAMA . 2013;310:1581 –1590 .
5.Baron SJ, Chinnakondepalli K, Magnuson EA, et al.
Quality-of-life after everolimus-eluting stents orbypass surgery for left-main disease: results from theEXCEL Trial. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2017;70:3113 –3122 .
6.Brooks MM, Chung SC, Helmy T, et al. Health status
after treatment for coronary artery disease and type 2diabetes mellitus in the Bypass Angioplasty Revascu-larization Investigation 2 Diabetes trial. Circulation .
2010;122:1690 –1699 .
7.Cashin WL, Sanmarco ME, Nessim SA, et al. Accel-
erated progression of atherosclerosis in coronary ves-sels with minimal lesions that are bypassed. N Engl J
Med. 1984;311:824 –828.
8.
Pitt B, Waters D, Brown WV, et al. Aggressive lipid-
lowering therapy compared with angioplasty in stablecoronary artery disease. Atorvastatin versus Revascu-larization Treatment Investigators. N Engl J Med .
1999;341:70 –76.
9.Wijeysundera HC, Nallamothu BK, Krumholz HM,
et al. Meta-analysis: effects of percutaneous coronary
intervention versus medical therapy on angina relief.Ann Intern Med . 2010;152:370 –379.
10.Weintraub WS, Spertus JA, Kolm P, et al. Effect of
PCI on quality of life in patients with stable coronarydisease. N Engl J Med . 2008;359:677 –687.
11.Al-Lamee R, Thompson D, Dehbi HM, et al. Percu-
taneous coronary intervention in stable angina
(ORBITA): a double-blind, randomised controlled trial.
Lancet . 2018;391:31 –40.8.1. Patients With Complex Disease
1.Morice MC, Serruys PW, Kappetein AP, et al. Five-
year outcomes in patients with left main diseasetreated with either percutaneous coronary interven-tion or coronary artery bypass grafting in the synergybetween percutaneous coronary intervention withtaxus and cardiac surgery trial. Circulation . 2014;129:
2388 –2394 .
2.Mohr FW, Morice MC, Kappetein AP, et al. Coronary
artery bypass graft surgery versus percutaneous cor-
onary intervention in patients with three-vessel dis-ease and left main coronary disease: 5-year follow-upof the randomised, clinical SYNTAX trial. Lancet .
2013;381:629 –638.
3.Serruys PW, Morice MC, Kappetein AP, et al.
Percutaneous coronary intervention versus coronary-artery bypass grafting for severe coronary artery dis-
ease. N Engl J Med . 2009;360:961 –972.
4.Thuijs D, Kappetein AP, Serruys PW, et al. Percuta-
neous coronary intervention versus coronary arterybypass grafting in patients with three-vessel or leftmain coronary artery disease: 10-year follow-up of themulticentre randomised controlled SYNTAX trial.Lancet . 2019;394:1325 –1334 .
5.Head SJ, Milojevic M, Daemen J, et al. Mortality
after coronary artery bypass grafting versus percuta-
neous coronary intervention with stenting for coronary
artery disease: a pooled analysis of individual patientdata. Lancet . 2018;391:939 –948.
6.Makikallio T, Holm NR, Lindsay M, et al. Percuta-
neous coronary angioplasty versus coronary arterybypass grafting in treatment of unprotected left mainstenosis (NOBLE): a prospective, randomised, open-label, non-inferiority trial. Lancet . 2016;388:2743 –
2752 .
7.Buszman PE, Buszman PP, Banasiewicz-Szkrobka I,
et al. Left main stenting in comparison with surgical
revascularization: 10-year outcomes of the (Left MainCoronary Artery Stenting) LE MANS Trial. J Am Coll
Cardiol Intv . 2016;9:318 –327.
8.Park SJ, Kim YH, Park DW, et al. Randomized trial of
stents versus bypass surgery for left main coronaryartery disease. N Engl J Med
. 2011;364:1718 –1727.
9.Boudriot E, Thiele H, Walther T, et al. Randomized
comparison of percutaneous coronary interventionwith sirolimus-eluting stents versus coronary artery
bypass grafting in unprotected left main stem stenosis.
J Am Coll Cardiol . 2011;57:538 –545.
10.Seung KB, Park DW, Kim YH, et al. Stents versus
coronary-artery bypass grafting for left main coronaryartery disease. N Engl J Med . 2008;358:1781 –1792 .
11.Gallo M, Blitzer D, Laforgia PL, et al. Percutaneous
coronary intervention versus coronary artery bypassgraft for left main coronary artery disease: a meta-analysis. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . Published online April
15, 2020. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtcvs.2020.04.010
12.Ahmad Y, Howard JP, Arnold AD, et al. Mortality
after drug-eluting stents vs. coronary artery bypassgrafting for left main coronary artery disease: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Eur Heart J .
2020;41:3228 –3235 .
13.Bittl JA, He Y, Jacobs AK, et al. Bayesian methods
afﬁrm the use of percutaneous coronary intervention
to improve survival in patients with unprotected left
main coronary artery disease. Circulation . 2013;127:
2177 –2185 .14.Cavalcante R, Sotomi Y, Lee CW, et al. Outcomes
after percutaneous coronary intervention or bypasssurgery in patients with unprotected left main disease.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2016;68:999 –1009 .
15.Farkouh ME, Domanski M, Sleeper LA, et al. Stra-
tegies for multivessel revascularization in patients with
diabetes. N Engl J Med . 2012;367:2375 –2384 .
16.Rodriguez AE, Baldi J, Fernandez Pereira C, et al.
Five-year follow-up of the Argentine randomized trialof coronary angioplasty with stenting versus coronarybypass surgery in patients with multiple vessel disease(ERACI II). J Am Coll Cardiol . 2005;46:582 –588.
17.Hueb W, Lopes N, Gersh BJ, et al. Ten-year follow-
up survival of the Medicine, Angioplasty, or SurgeryStudy (MASS II): a randomized controlled clinical trialof 3 therapeutic strategies for multivessel coronaryartery disease. Circulation . 2010;122:949 –957.
18.Gaudino M, Hameed I, Farkouh ME, et al. Overall
and cause-speci ﬁc mortality in randomized clinical
trials comparing percutaneous interventions with cor-
onary bypass surgery: a meta-analysis. JAMA Intern
Med. 2020;180:1638 –1646 .
19.Doenst T, Haverich A, Serruys P, et al. PCI and
CABG for treating stable coronary artery disease: JACCreview topic of the week. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;73:
964
–976.
20.Stone GW, Kappetein AP, Sabik JF, et al. Five-year
outcomes after PCI or CABG for left main coronary
disease. N Engl J Med . 2019;381:1820 –1830 .
8.2. Patients With Diabetes
1.Farkouh ME, Domanski M, Sleeper LA, et al. Stra-
tegies for multivessel revascularization in patients with
diabetes. N Engl J Med . 2012;367:2375 –2384 .
2.Farkouh ME, Domanski M, Dangas GD, et al. Long-
term survival following multivessel revascularization inpatients with diabetes: the FREEDOM follow-on study.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;73:629 –638.
3.Kamalesh M, Sharp TG, Tang XC, et al. Percutaneous
coronary intervention versus coronary bypass surgeryin United States veterans with diabetes. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2013;61:808 –816.
4.Kappetein AP, Head SJ, Morice MC, et al. Treatment
of complex coronary artery disease in patients withdiabetes: 5-year results comparing outcomes of bypasssurgery and percutaneous coronary intervention in theSYNTAX trial. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg . 2013;43:1006 –
1013 .
5.Head SJ, Milojevic M, Daemen J, et al. Mortality
after coronary artery bypass grafting versus percuta-neous coronary intervention with stenting for coronaryartery disease: a pooled analysis of individual patientdata. Lancet . 2018;391:939 –948.
6.Verma S, Farkouh ME, Yanagawa B, et al. Compar-
ison of coronary artery bypass surgery and percuta-
neous coronary intervention in patients with diabetes:
a meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Lancet
Diabetes Endocrinol . 2013;1:317 –328.
7.Park SJ, Ahn JM, Kim YH, et al. Trial of everolimus-
eluting stents or bypass surgery for coronary disease.N Engl J Med . 2015;372:1204 –1212.
8.Park DW, Kim YH, Song HG, et al. Long-term
outcome of stents versus bypass surgery in diabetic
and nondiabetic patients with multivessel or left main
coronary artery disease: a pooled analysis of 5775JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee103

individual patient data. Circ Cardiovasc Interv . 2012;5:
467–475.
9.Pandey A, McGuire DK, de Lemos JA, et al. Revas-
cularization trends in patients with diabetes mellitusand multivessel coronary artery disease presentingwith non-ST elevation myocardial infarction: insights
from the National Cardiovascular Data Registry Acute
Coronary Treatment and Intervention OutcomesNetwork Registry-get with the guidelines (NCDR AC-TION Registry-GWTG). Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes .
2016;9:197 –205.
10.Sedlis SP, Morrison DA, Lorin JD, et al. Percuta-
neous coronary intervention versus coronary bypassgraft surgery for diabetic patients with unstable angina
and risk factors for adverse outcomes with bypass:
outcome of diabetic patients in the AWESOME ran-domized trial and registry. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2002;40:
1555 –1566 .
11.Milojevic M, Serruys PW, Sabik JF 3rd, et al. Bypass
surgery or stenting for left main coronary artery dis-ease in patients with diabetes. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2019;73:1616 –1628 .
12.Mohr FW, Morice MC, Kappetein AP, et al. Coronary
artery bypass graft surgery versus percutaneous cor-
onary intervention in patients with three-vessel dis-
ease and left main coronary disease: 5-year follow-upof the randomised, clinical SYNTAX trial. Lancet .
2013;381:629 –638.
13.Stone GW, Sabik JF, Serruys PW, et al. Everolimus-
eluting stents or bypass surgery for left main coronaryartery disease. N Engl J Med . 2016;375:2223 –2235 .
14.Makikallio T, Holm NR, Lindsay M, et al. Percuta-
neous coronary angioplasty versus coronary artery
bypass grafting in treatment of unprotected left main
stenosis (NOBLE): a prospective, randomised, open-label, non-inferiority trial. Lancet . 2016;388:2743 –
2752 .
15.Armstrong EJ, Rutledge JC, Rogers JH. Coronary
artery revascularization in patients with diabetesmellitus. Circulation . 2013;128:1675 –1685 .
16.Thuijs D, Kappetein AP, Serruys PW, et al. Percu-
taneous coronary intervention versus coronary arterybypass grafting in patients with three-vessel or left
main coronary artery disease: 10-year follow-up of the
multicentre randomised controlled SYNTAX trial.Lancet . 2019;394:1325 –1334 .
17.Head SJ, Milojevic M, Daemen J, et al. Stroke rates
following surgical versus percutaneous coronaryrevascularization. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2018;72:386 –398.
8.3. Patients With Previous CABG
1.Yap C-H, Sposato L, Akowuah E, et al. Contemporary
results show repeat coronary artery bypass grafting
remains a risk factor for operative mortality. Ann
Thorac Surg . 2009;87:1386 –
1391.
2.Morrison DA, Sethi G, Sacks J, et al. Percutaneous
coronary intervention versus repeat bypass surgery forpatients with medically refractory myocardialischemia: AWESOME randomized trial and registryexperience with post-CABG patients. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2002;40:1951 –1954 .
3.Brener SJ, Lytle BW, Casserly IP, et al. Predictors of
revascularization method and long-term outcome of
percutaneous coronary intervention or repeat coronarybypass surgery in patients with multivessel coronarydisease and previous coronary bypass surgery. Eur
Heart J . 2006;27:413 –418.4.Sabik JF, Raza S, Blackstone EH, et al. Value of in-
ternal thoracic artery grafting to the left anteriordescending coronary artery at coronary reoperation.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2013;61:302 –310.
5.Tajti P, Karmpaliotis D, Alaswad K, et al. In-hospital
outcomes of chronic total occlusion percutaneous
coronary interventions in patients with prior coronary
artery bypass graft surgery. Circ Cardiovasc Interv .
2019;12:e007338 .
6.Toma A, Stähli BE, Gick M, et al. Long-term follow-
up of patients with previous coronary artery bypassgrafting undergoing percutaneous coronary interven-tion for chronic total occlusion. Am J Cardiol . 2016;118:
1641 –1646 .
7.Pershad A, Gulati M, Karmpaliotis D, et al. A sex
strati ﬁed outcome analysis from the OPEN-CTO reg-
istry. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv . 2019;93:1041 –1047 .
8.van der Heijden LC, Kok MM, Zocca P, et al. Long-
term outcome of consecutive patients with previouscoronary bypass surgery, treated with newer-generation drug-eluting stents. J Am Heart Assoc .
2018;7:e007212 .
9.Brilakis ES, Rao SV, Banerjee S, et al. Percutaneous
coronary intervention in native arteries versus bypassgrafts in prior coronary artery bypass grafting patients:
a report from the National Cardiovascular Data Reg-
istry. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv . 2011;4:844 –850.
10.Alkhouli M, Alqahtani F, Alreshidan M, et al. Inci-
dence, predictors, and outcomes of early acutemyocardial infarction following coronary artery bypassgrafting. Am J Cardiol . 2019;124:1027 –1030 .
11.Abdel-Karim A-RR, Banerjee S, Brilakis ES. Percu-
taneous intervention of acutely occluded saphenousvein grafts: contemporary techniques and outcomes.J Invasive Cardiol . 2010;22:253 –257.
12.Subramanian S, Sabik JF 3rd, Houghtaling PL, et al.
Decision-making for patients with patent left internal
thoracic artery grafts to left anterior descending. Ann
Thorac Surg . 2009;87:1392 –1398. discussion 400 .
13.Gyenes G, Norris CM, Graham MM. Percutaneous
revascularization improves outcomes in patients with
prior coronary artery bypass surgery. Catheter Car-
diovasc Interv . 2013;82:E148 –E154 .
8.4. DAPT Adherence
1.Almalla M, Schroder J, Hennings V, et al. Long-term
outcome after angiographically proven coronary stent
thrombosis. Am J Cardiol . 2013;111:1289 –1294 .
2.Brodie BR, Garg A, Stuckey TD, et al. Fixed and
modiﬁable correlates of drug-eluting stent thrombosis
from a large all-comers registry: insights from ADAPT-DES. Circ Cardiovasc Interv . 2015;8:e002568 .
3.Cutlip DE, Kereiakes DJ, Mauri L, et al. Thrombotic
complications associated with early and late non-adherence to dual antiplatelet therapy. J Am Coll
Cardiol Intv . 2015;8:404 –410.
4.Genereux P, Rutledge DR, Palmerini T, et al. Stent
thrombosis and dual antiplatelet therapy interruption
with everolimus-eluting stents: insights from theXience V coronary stent system trials. Circ Cardiovasc
Interv . 2015;8:e001362 .
5.Jeger RV, P ﬁsterer ME, Sorensen R, et al. Tradeoff
between bleeding and stent thrombosis in differentdual antiplatelet therapy regimes: importance of casefatality rates and effective treatment durations. Am
Heart J . 2014;168:698 –705.6.Koskinas KC, Zanchin T, Klingenberg R, et al.
Incidence, predictors, and clinical impact of earlyprasugrel cessation in patients with ST-elevationmyocardial infarction. J Am Heart Assoc . 2018;7:
e008085 .
7.Mehran R, Baber U, Steg PG, et al. Cessation of dual
antiplatelet treatment and cardiac events after
percutaneous coronary intervention (PARIS): 2 yearresults from a prospective observational study. Lancet .
2013;382:1714 –1722 .
8.Rozemeijer R, Wing Wong C, Leenders G, et al.
Incidence, angiographic and clinical predictors, andimpact of stent thrombosis: a 6-year survey of 6,545 consecutive patients. Neth Heart J . 2019;27:
321–329.
9.Secemsky EA, Matteau A, Yeh RW, et al. Comparison
of short- and long-term cardiac mortality in early
versus late stent thrombosis (from pooled PROTECTtrials). Am J Cardiol . 2015;115:1678 –1684 .
10.Silber S, Kirtane AJ, Belardi JA, et al. Lack of as-
sociation between dual antiplatelet therapy use andstent thrombosis between 1 and 12 months followingresolute zotarolimus-eluting stent implantation. Eur
Heart J . 2014;35:1949 –1956 .
9.1. Revascularization in Pregnant Patients
1.
Baris L, Hakeem A, Moe T, et al. Acute coronary
syndrome and ischemic heart disease in pregnancy:data from the EURObservational ResearchProgramme-European Society of Cardiology registry ofpregnancy and cardiac disease. J Am Heart Assoc .
2020;9:e015490 .
2.Smilowitz NR, Gupta N, Guo Y, et al. Acute
myocardial infarction during pregnancy and the puer-perium in the United States. Mayo Clin Proc . 2018;93:
1404 –1414 .
3.Mehta LS, Warnes CA, Bradley E, et al. Cardiovas-
cular considerations in caring for pregnant patients: ascienti ﬁc statement from the American Heart Associ-
ation. Circulation . 2020;141:e884 –e903 .
4.Nana M, Morgan H, Moore S, et al. Antiplatelet
therapy in pregnancy: a systematic review. Pharmacol
Res. 2021;168:105547 .
5.Regitz-Zagrosek V, Roos-Hesselink JW,
Bauersachs J, et al. 2018 ESC guidelines for the man-
agement of cardiovascular diseases during pregnancy.Eur Heart J . 2018;39:3165 –3241 .
6.Amsterdam EA, Wenger NK, Brindis RG, et al. 2014
AHA/ACC guideline for the management of patientswith non-ST-elevation acute coronary syndromes: areport of the American College of Cardiology/Amer-ican Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guide-
lines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;64:e139 –e228 .
9.2. Revascularization in Older Patients
1.Tinetti ME, Bogardus ST Jr, Agostini JV. Potential
pitfalls of disease-speci ﬁc guidelines for patients with
multiple conditions. N Engl J Med . 2004;351:2870 –
2874 .
2.Yourman LC, Lee SJ, Schonberg MA, et al. Prog-
nostic indices for older adults: a systematic review.
JAMA . 2012;307:182 –192.
3.Varenne O, Cook S, Sideris G, et al. Drug-eluting
stents in elderly patients with coronary artery disease(SENIOR): a randomised single-blind trial. Lancet .
2018;391:41 –50.Lawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e104

4.Roberts WC, Shirani J. Comparison of cardiac ﬁnd-
ings at necropsy in octogenarians, nonagenarians, andcentenarians. Am J Cardiol . 1998;82:627 –631.
5.Seki A, Fishbein MC. Age-related cardiovascular
changes and diseases. In: Buja LM, Butany J, eds.Cardiovascular Pathology . Fourth Edition. Elsevier, Inc;
2016:57 –83.
6.Guagliumi G, Stone GW, Cox DA, et al. Outcome in
elderly patients undergoing primary coronary inter-vention for acute myocardial infarction: results fromthe Controlled Abciximab and Device Investigation toLower Late Angioplasty Complications (CADILLAC)trial. Circulation . 2004;110:1598 –1604 .
7.Li L, Geraghty OC, Mehta Z, et al. Age-speci ﬁc risks,
severity, time course, and outcome of bleeding onlong-term antiplatelet treatment after vascularevents: a population-based cohort study. Lancet .
2017;390:490 –499.
8.Urban P, Meredith IT, Abizaid A, et al. Polymer-free
drug-coated coronary stents in patients at highbleeding risk. N Engl J Med . 2015;373:2038 –2047 .
9.Lee PY, Alexander KP, Hammill BG, et al. Repre-
sentation of elderly persons and women in publishedrandomized trials of acute coronary syndromes. JAMA .
2001;286:708 –713.
10.Batchelor WB, Anstrom KJ, Muhlbaier LH, et al.
Contemporary outcome trends in the elderly under-going percutaneous coronary interventions: results in7,472 octogenarians. National Cardiovascular NetworkCollaboration. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2000;36:723 –730.
11.Johnman C, Oldroyd KG, Mackay DF, et al. Percu-
taneous coronary intervention in the elderly: changesin case-mix and periprocedural outcomes in 31,758patients treated between 2000 and 2007. Circ Car-
diovasc Interv . 2010;3:341 –345.
12.Singh M, Peterson ED, Roe MT, et al. Trends in the
association between age and in-hospital mortality af-ter percutaneous coronary intervention: National Car-diovascular Data Registry experience. Circ Cardiovasc
Interv . 2009;2:20 –26.
13.Capodanno D, Angiolillo DJ. Antithrombotic ther-
apy in the elderly. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2010;56:1683 –
1692 .
14.Lakatta EG, Levy D. Arterial and cardiac aging:
major shareholders in cardiovascular disease enter-prises: part II: the aging heart in health: links to heartdisease. Circulation . 2003;107:346 –354.
15.Newman AB, Naydeck BL, Sutton-Tyrrell K, et al.
Coronary artery calci ﬁcation in older adults to age 99:
prevalence and risk factors. Circulation . 2001;104:
2679 –2684 .
16.Graham MM, Ghali WA, Faris PD, et al. Survival
after coronary revascularization in the elderly. Circu-
lation . 2002;105:2378 –2384 .
17.Aﬁlalo J, Karunananthan S, Eisenberg MJ, et al.
Role of frailty in patients with cardiovascular disease.
Am J Cardiol . 2009;103:1616 –1621 .
18.Stone GW, Sabik JF, Serruys PW, et al. Everolimus-
eluting stents or bypass surgery for left main coronaryartery disease. N Engl J Med . 2016;375:2223 –2235 .
19.Park SJ, Ahn JM, Kim YH, et al. Trial of everolimus-
eluting stents or bypass surgery for coronary disease.N Engl J Med . 2015;372:1204 –1212.
20.Ahn JM, Roh JH, Kim YH, et al. Randomized trial of
stents versus bypass surgery for left main coronaryartery disease: 5-year outcomes of the PRECOMBAT
Study. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2015;65:2198 –2206 .
21.Madhavan MV, Gersh BJ, Alexander KP, et al.
Coronary artery disease in patients $80 years of age.
J Am Coll Cardiol . 2018;71:2015 –2040 .
9.3. Revascularization in Patients With Chronic
Kidney Disease (CKD)
1.Mehran R, Aymong ED, Nikolsky E, et al. A simple
risk score for prediction of contrast-induced ne-
phropathy after percutaneous coronary intervention:development and initial validation. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2004;44:1393 –1399 .
2.Moscucci M, Rogers EK, Montoye C, et al. Associa-
tion of a continuous quality improvement initiativewith practice and outcome variations of contemporarypercutaneous coronary interventions. Circulation .
2006;113:814 –822.
3.Mehran R, Dangas GD, Weisbord SD. Contrast-
associated acute kidney injury. N Engl J Med .
2019;380:2146 –2155 .
4.Smilowitz NR, Gupta N, Guo Y, et al. Management
and outcomes of acute myocardial infarction in pa-tients with chronic kidney disease. Int J Cardiol .
2017;227:1 –7.
5.
Bhatia S, Arora S, Bhatia SM, et al. Non-ST-
segment-elevation myocardial infarction amongpatients with chronic kidney disease: a propensityscore-matched comparison of percutaneous coronaryintervention versus conservative management. JA m
Heart Assoc . 2018;7:e007920 .
6.Bangalore S, Maron DJ, Fleg JL, et al. International
Study of Comparative Health Effectiveness withMedical and Invasive Approaches —Chronic Kidney
Disease (ISCHEMIA-CKD): rationale and design. Am
Heart J . 2018;205:42 –52.
7.Collins AJ, Foley RN, Gilbertson DT, et al. United
States Renal Data System public health surveillance ofchronic kidney disease and end-stage renal disease.
Kidney Int Suppl (2011) . 2015;5:2 –7.
8.Coresh J, Selvin E, Stevens LA, et al. Prevalence of
chronic kidney disease in the United States. JAMA .
2007;298:2038 –2047 .
9.Fox KAA, Clayton TC, Damman P, et al. Long-term
outcome of a routine versus selective invasive strategyin patients with non-ST-segment elevation acute cor-onary syndrome a meta-analysis of individual patient
data. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2010;55:2435 –2445 .
10.Eagle KA, Lim MJ, Dabbous OH, et al. A validated
prediction model for all forms of acute coronary syn-drome: estimating the risk of 6-month postdischarge
death in an international registry. JAMA . 2004;291:
2727 –2733 .
11.Fox CS, Matsushita K, Woodward M, et al. Associ-
ations of kidney disease measures with mortality and
end-stage renal disease in individuals with and without
diabetes: a meta-analysis. Lancet . 2012;380:1662 –
1673 .
12.Matsushita K, van der Velde M, Astor BC, et al.
Association of estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate and
albuminuria with all-cause and cardiovascular mortal-ity in general population cohorts: a collaborativemeta-analysis. Chronic Kidney Disease Prognosis Con-sortium. Lancet . 2010;375:2073 –2081 .
13.Tsai TT, Messenger JC, Brennan JM, et al. Safety
and ef ﬁcacy of drug-eluting stents in older patientswith chronic kidney disease: a report from the linked
CathPCI Registry-CMS claims database. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2011;58:1859 –1869 .
14.Dehmer GJ, Weaver D, Roe MT, et al.
A contemporary view of diagnostic cardiac catheteri-zation and percutaneous coronary intervention in theUnited States: a report from the CathPCI Registry of
the National Cardiovascular Data Registry, 2010
through June 2011. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2012;60:2017 –
2031 .
15.Blicher TM, Hommel K, Olesen JB, et al. Less use of
standard guideline-based treatment of myocardial
infarction in patients with chronic kidney disease: aDanish nation-wide cohort study. Eur Heart J . 2013;34:
2916 –2923 .
16.Han JH, Chandra A, Mulgund J, et al. Chronic kid-
ney disease in patients with non-ST-segment elevationacute coronary syndromes. Am J Med . 2006;119:248 –
254.
17.Wong JA, Goodman SG, Yan RT, et al. Temporal
management patterns and outcomes of non-ST
elevation acute coronary syndromes in patients withkidney dysfunction. Eur Heart J . 2009;30:549 –557.
18.Marenzi G, Assanelli E, Campodonico J, et al.
Contrast volume during primary percutaneous coro-nary intervention and subsequent contrast-inducednephropathy and mortality. Ann Intern Med .
2009;150:170 –177.
19.Merten GJ, Burgess WP, Gray LV, et al. Prevention
of contrast-induced nephropathy with sodium bicar-bonate: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA .
2004;291:2328 –2334 .
20.Mueller C, Buerkle G, Buettner HJ, et al. Preven-
tion of contrast media-associated nephropathy: ran-
domized comparison of 2 hydration regimens in 1620
patients undergoing coronary angioplasty. Arch Intern
Med. 2002;162:329 –336.
21.Giacoppo D, Gargiulo G, Buccheri S, et al. Preven-
tive strategies for contrast-induced acute kidney injuryin patients undergoing percutaneous coronary pro-cedures: evidence from a hierarchical Bayesiannetwork meta-analysis of 124 trials and 28 240 pa-tients. Circ Cardiovasc Interv . 2017;10:e004383 .
22.Laskey WK, Jenkins C, Selzer F, et al. Volume-to-
creatinine clearance ratio: a pharmacokinetically based
risk factor for prediction of early creatinine increase
after percutaneous coronary intervention. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2007;50:584 –590.
23.McCullough PA, Wolyn R, Rocher LL, et al. Acute
renal failure after coronary intervention: incidence, riskfactors, and relationship to mortality. Am J Med .
1997;103:368 –375.
24.Li Y, Liu Y, Fu L, et al. Ef ﬁcacy of short-term high-
dose statin in preventing contrast-induced nephropa-thy: a meta-analysis of seven randomized controlledtrials. PLoS One . 2012;7:e34450 .
25.Leoncini M, Toso A, Maioli M, et al. Early high-dose
rosuvastatin and cardioprotection in the protectiveeffect of rosuvastatin and antiplatelet therapy on
contrast-induced acute kidney injury and myocardial
damage in patients with acute coronary syndrome(PRATO-ACS) study. Am Heart J . 2014;168:792 –797.
26.Davignon J. Bene ﬁcial cardiovascular pleiotropic
effects of statins. Circulation . 2004;109:III-39 –III-43 .
27.Ichiki T, Takeda K, Tokunou T, et al. Down-
regulation of angiotensin II type 1 receptor byJACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee105

hydrophobic 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A
reductase inhibitors in vascular smooth muscle cells.Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol . 2001;21:1896 –1901 .
28.Hernández-Perera O, Pérez-Sala D, Navarro-
Antolín J, et al. Effects of the 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA reductase inhibitors, atorvastatinand simvastatin, on the expression of endothelin-1 andendothelial nitric oxide synthase in vascular endothe-
lial cells. J Clin Invest . 1998;101:2711 –2719 .
29.Bonetti PO, Lerman LO, Napoli C, et al. Statin ef-
fects beyond lipid lowering —are they clinically rele-
vant? Eur Heart J . 2003;24:225 –248.
30.Stratta P, Bozzola C, Quaglia M. Pitfall in
nephrology: contrast nephropathy has to be differen-tiated from renal damage due to atheroembolic dis-ease. J Nephrol . 2012;25:282 –289.
31.Cortese B, Sciahbasi A, Sebik R, et al. Comparison
of risk of acute kidney injury after primary percuta-neous coronary interventions with the transradialapproach versus the transfemoral approach (from the
PRIPITENA urban registry). Am J Cardiol . 2014;114:
820 –825.
32.Andò G, Cortese B, Russo F, et al. Acute kidney
injury after radial or femoral access for invasive acute
coronary syndrome management: AKI-MATRIX. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2017;69:2592 –2603 .
33.Kooiman J, Seth M, Dixon S, et al. Risk of acute
kidney injury after percutaneous coronary in-
terventions using radial versus femoral vascular ac-
cess: insights from the Blue Cross Blue Shield ofMichigan Cardiovascular Consortium. Circ Cardiovasc
Interv . 2014;7:190 –198.
34.Keeley EC, Boura JA, Grines CL. Primary angio-
plasty versus intravenous thrombolytic therapy foracute myocardial infarction: a quantitative review of 23randomised trials. Lancet . 2003;361:13 –20.
35.Santopinto JJ, Fox KA, Goldberg RJ, et al. Creati-
nine clearance and adverse hospital outcomes in pa-tients with acute coronary syndromes: ﬁndings from
the global registry of acute coronary events (GRACE).Heart . 2003;89:1003 –1008 .
36.Januzzi JL, Cannon CP, DiBattiste PM, et al. Effects
of renal insuf ﬁciency on early invasive management in
patients with acute coronary syndromes (TheTACTICS-TIMI 18 Trial). Am J Cardiol . 2002;90:1246 –
1249 .
37.Gibson CM, Dumaine RL, Gelfand EV, et al. Asso-
ciation of glomerular ﬁltration rate on presentation
with subsequent mortality in non-ST-segment eleva-tion acute coronary syndrome; observations in 13,307
patients in
ﬁve TIMI trials. Eur Heart J . 2004;25:1998 –
2005 .
38.ACT Investigators. Acetylcysteine for prevention
of renal outcomes in patients undergoing coronary and
peripheral vascular angiography: main results from the
randomized Acetylcysteine for Contrast-induced ne-phropathy Trial (ACT). Circulation . 2011;124:1250 –
1259 .
39.Thiele H, Hildebrand L, Schirdewahn C, et al.
Impact of high-dose N-acetylcysteine versus placeboon contrast-induced nephropathy and myocardialreperfusion injury in unselected patients with ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction undergoingprimary percutaneous coronary intervention. The
LIPSIA-N-ACC (Prospective, Single-Blind, Placebo-
Controlled, Randomized Leipzig Immediate Percuta-neouS Coronary Intervention Acute MyocardialInfarction N-ACC) Trial. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2010;55:
2201 –2209 .
40.Gonzales DA, Norsworthy KJ, Kern SJ, et al.
A meta-analysis of N-acetylcysteine in contrast-induced nephrotoxicity: unsupervised clustering toresolve heterogeneity. BMC Med . 2007;5:32 .
41.Vogt B, Ferrari P, Schönholzer C, et al. Prophylactic
hemodialysis after radiocontrast media in patients with
renal insuf ﬁciency is potentially harmful. Am J Med .
2001;111:692 –698.
42.Cruz DN, Goh CY, Marenzi G, et al. Renal replace-
ment therapies for prevention of radiocontrast-induced nephropathy: a systematic review. Am J
Med. 2012;125:66 –78.e3 .
43.Warren J, Mehran R, Baber U, et al. Incidence and
impact of acute kidney injury in patients with acutecoronary syndromes treated with coronary artery
bypass grafting: insights from the Harmonizing Out-
comes With Revascularization and Stents inAcute Myocardial Infarction (HORIZONS-AMI) andAcute Catheterization and Urgent Intervention TriageStrategy (ACUITY) trials. Am Heart J . 2016;171:40 –47.
44.Mehta RH, Honeycutt E, Patel UD, et al. Rela-
tionship of the time interval between cardiac cathe-terization and elective coronary artery bypass surgery
with postprocedural acute kidney injury. Circulation .
2011;124:S149 –S155 .
45.Mariscalco G, Banach M. Editorial: atrial ﬁbrillation
after coronary surgery: the need for an effectivepharmacological prophylaxis. Curr Vasc Pharmacol .
2013;11:985 –987.
9.4. Revascularization in Patients Before Noncardiac
Surgery
1.McFalls EO, Ward HB, Moritz TE, et al. Coronary-
artery revascularization before elective major vascular
surgery. N Engl J Med . 2004;351:2795 –2804 .
2.Smilowitz NR, Guo Y, Rao S, et al. Perioperative
cardiovascular outcomes of non-cardiac solid organ
transplant surgery. Eur Heart J Qual Care Clin Out-
comes . 2019;5:72 –78.
3.Garcia S, Moritz TE, Ward HB, et al. Usefulness of
revascularization of patients with multivessel coronaryartery disease before elective vascular surgery forabdominal aortic and peripheral occlusive disease. Am
J Cardiol . 2008;102:809 –813.
9.5. Revascularization in Patients to Reduce
Ventricular Arrhythmias
1.Cook JR, Rizo-Patron C, Curtis AB, et al. Effect of
surgical revascularization in patients with coronaryartery disease and ventricular tachycardia or ﬁbrilla-
tion in the Antiarrhythmics Versus ImplantableDeﬁbrillators (AVID) Registry. Am Heart J . 2002;143:
821–826.
2.Dumas F, Cariou A, Manzo-Silberman S, et al. Im-
mediate percutaneous coronary intervention is asso-
ciated with better survival after out-of-hospitalcardiac arrest: insights from the PROCAT (ParisianRegion Out of hospital Cardiac ArresT) registry. Circ
Cardiovasc Interv . 2010;3:200 –207.
3.Every NR, Fahrenbruch CE, Hallstrom AP, et al.
Inﬂuence of coronary bypass surgery on subsequent
outcome of patients resuscitated from out of
hospital cardiac arrest. J Am Coll Cardiol . 1992;19:
1435 –1439 .4.Dumas F, Bougouin W, Geri G, et al. Emergency
percutaneous coronary intervention in post-cardiacarrest patients without ST-segment elevationpattern: insights from the PROCAT II Registry. JA m
Coll Cardiol Intv . 2016;9:1011 –1018 .
5.Brugada J, Aguinaga L, Mont L, et al. Coronary ar-
tery revascularization in patients with sustained ven-
tricular arrhythmias in the chronic phase of a
myocardial infarction: effects on the electrophysio-logic substrate and outcome. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2001;37:529 –533.
6.Chiriac L, Dumitrescu S, Samoil /C21a M, et al. Evaluation
at patients with ventricular arrhythmias and coronaryartery disease of myocardial revascularization effects.Rom J Intern Med . 2010;48:47 –50.
7.Mondésert B, Khairy P, Schram G, et al. Impact of
revascularization in patients with sustained ventriculararrhythmias, prior myocardial infarction, and preserved
left ventricular ejection fraction. Heart Rhythm .
2016;13:1221 –1227 .
8.Elsokkari I, Parkash R, Gray CJ, et al. Effect of cor-
onary revascularization on long-term clinical outcomesin patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy and recur-rent ventricular arrhythmia. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol .
2018;41:775 –
779.
9.Chi WK, Gong M, Bazoukis G, et al. Impact of cor-
onary artery chronic total occlusion on arrhythmic andmortality outcomes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Am Coll Cardiol EP . 2018;4:1214 –1223 .
10.Cronier P, Vignon P, Bouferrache K, et al. Impact of
routine percutaneous coronary intervention after out-
of-hospital cardiac arrest due to ventricular
ﬁbrillation. Crit Care (London, England) . 2011;15:R122 .
11.Spaulding CM, Joly LM, Rosenberg A, et al. Imme-
diate coronary angiography in survivors of out-of-
hospital cardiac arrest. N Engl J Med . 1997;336:1629 –
1633 .
12.Al-Khatib SM, Stevenson WG, Ackerman MJ, et al.
2017 AHA/ACC/HRS guideline for management of pa-tients with ventricular arrhythmias and the preventionof sudden cardiac death: a report of the AmericanCollege of Cardiology/American Heart Association TaskForce on Clinical Practice Guidelines and the Heart
Rhythm Society. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2018;72:e91 –e220 .
13.Ngaage DL, Cale AR, Cowen ME, et al. Early and
late survival after surgical revascularization for
ischemic ventricular ﬁbrillation/tachycardia. Ann
Thorac Surg . 2008;85:1278 –1281 .
14.Zanuttini D, Armellini I, Nucifora G, et al. Impact of
emergency coronary angiography on in-hospitaloutcome of unconscious survivors after out-of-hospitalcardiac arrest. Am J Cardiol . 2012;110:1723 –1728 .
15.Kalarus Z, Svendsen JH, Capodanno D, et al. Car-
diac arrhythmias in the emergency settings of acutecoronary syndrome and revascularization: an EuropeanHeart Rhythm Association (EHRA) consensus docu-
ment. Europace . 2019;21:1603 –1604 .
16.Milojevic M, Head SJ, Parasca CA, et al. Causes of
death following PCI versus CABG in complex CAD: 5-
year follow-up of SYNTAX. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2016;67:42 –55.
17.Velazquez EJ, Lee KL, Jones RH, et al. Coronary-
artery bypass surgery in patients with ischemic car-diomyopathy. N Engl J Med . 2016;374:1511 –1520 .
18.Carson P, Wertheimer J, Miller A, et al. The STICH
trial (Surgical Treatment for Ischemic Heart Failure):Lawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e106

mode-of-death results. J Am Coll Cardiol HF . 2013;1:
400 –408.
19.Berntsen RF, Gunnes P, Lie M, et al. Surgical
revascularization in the treatment of ventricular
tachycardia and ﬁbrillation exposed by exercise-
induced ischaemia. Eur Heart J . 1993;14:1297 –1303 .
20.Andersen JA, Freeman P, Larsen JM, et al. Mono-
morphic ventricular tachycardia as the primary pre-
sentation of an anterior STEMI. Clin Case Rep . 2019;7:
1680 –1684 .
21.Marrakchi S, Laroussi L, Bennour E, et al. Coronary
PCI revascularization novel treatment of bundlebranch reentrant ventricular tachycardia. J Cardiol
Cases . 2019;20:151 –154.
22.Mathes P. The effect of coronary revascularization
on exercise-induced ventricular arrhythmias. Eur Heart
J. 1987;8(Suppl D):79 –81.
23.Raja V, Wiegn P, Obel O, et al. Impact of chronic
total occlusions and coronary revascularization on all-cause mortality and the incidence of ventricular ar-rhythmias in patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy.Am J Cardiol . 2015;116:1358 –1362 .
9.6. Revascularization in Patients With SCAD
1.Jamil A, Tajrishi FZ, Kahe F, et al. Spontaneous
coronary artery dissection managed with a conserva-tive or revascularization approach: a meta-analysis.J Cardiovasc Med . 2020;21:42 –50.
2.Lettieri C, Zavalloni D, Rossini R, et al. Management
and long-term prognosis of spontaneous coronary ar-tery dissection. Am J Cardiol . 2015;116:66 –73.
3.Lobo AS, Cantu SM, Sharkey SW, et al. Revascular-
ization in patients with spontaneous coronary arterydissection and ST-segment elevation myocardialinfarction. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;74:1290 –1300 .
4.Martins JL, Afreixo V, Santos L, et al. Medical
treatment or revascularisation as the best approach for
spontaneous coronary artery dissection: a systematicreview and meta-analysis. Eur Heart J Acute Cardiovasc
Care. 2018;7:614 –623.
5.Tweet MS, Eleid MF, Best PJ, et al. Spontaneous
coronary artery dissection: revascularization versus
conservative therapy. Circ Cardiovasc Interv . 2014;7:
777–786.
6.Hayes SN, Kim ESH, Saw J, et al. Spontaneous cor-
onary artery dissection: current state of the science: a
scienti ﬁc statement from the American Heart Associ-
ation. Circulation . 2018;137:e523 –e557 .
7.Saw J, Aymong E, Sedlak T, et al. Spontaneous
coronary artery dissection: association with predis-posing arteriopathies and precipitating stressors and
cardiovascular outcomes. Circ Cardiovasc Interv .
2014;7:645 –655.
9.7. Revascularization in Patients With Cardiac
Allografts
1.Lee MS, Lluri G, Finch W, et al. Role of percutaneous
coronary intervention in the treatment of cardiacallograft vasculopathy. Am J Cardiol . 2018;121:1051 –
1055 .
2.Luc JGY, Choi JH, Rizvi SA, et al. Percutaneous
coronary intervention versus coronary artery bypassgrafting in heart transplant recipients with coronaryallograft vasculopathy: a systematic review and meta-analysis of 1,520 patients. Ann Cardiothorac Surg .
2018;7:19 –30.
3.Taylor DO, Stehlik J, Edwards LB, et al. Registry of
the International Society for Heart and Lung Trans-plantation: Twenty-sixth Of ﬁcial Adult Heart Trans-
plant Report-2009. J Heart Lung Transplant . 2009;28:
1007 –1022 .
4.Dasari TW, Hennebry TA, Hanna EB, et al. Drug
eluting versus bare metal stents in cardiac allograftvasculopathy: a systematic review of literature. Cath-
eter Cardiovasc Interv . 2011;77:962 –969.
5.Gao SZ, Hunt SA, Schroeder JS, et al. Does rapidity
of development of transplant coronary artery diseaseportend a worse prognosis? J Heart Lung Transplant .
1994;13:1119 –1124.
6.Agarwal S, Parashar A, Kapadia SR, et al. Long-term
mortality after cardiac allograft vasculopathy: impli-cations of percutaneous intervention. J Am Coll Cardiol
HF. 2014;2:281 –288.
7.Johnson DE, Alderman EL, Schroeder JS, et al.
Transplant coronary artery disease: histopathologiccorrelations with angiographic morphology. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 1991;17:449 –457.
8.Raichlin ER, McConnell JP, Lerman A, et al. Systemic
inﬂammation and metabolic syndrome in cardiac allo-
graft vasculopathy. J Heart Lung Transplant . 2007;26:
826 –833.
9.Colombo P, Bruschi G, Sacco A, et al. Percutaneous
coronary interventions in cardiac allograft vasculop-
athy: a single-center experience. Transplant Proc .
2010;42:1286 –1290 .
10.Serruys PW, Morice MC, Kappetein AP, et al.
Percutaneous coronary intervention versus coronary-
artery bypass grafting for severe coronary artery dis-
ease. N Engl J Med . 2009;360:961 –972.
11.Kobashigawa J. What is the optimal prophylaxis for
treatment of cardiac allograft vasculopathy? Curr
Control Trials Cardiovasc Med . 2000;1:166 –171.
12.Srivastava R, Keck BM, Bennett LE, et al. The re-
sults of cardiac retransplantation: an analysis of theJoint International Society for Heart and Lung Trans-plantation/United Network for Organ Sharing Thoracic
Registry. Transplantation . 2000;70:606 –612.
13.Schmauss D, Weis M. Cardiac allograft vasculop-
athy: recent developments. Circulation . 2008;117:
2131 –2141.
14.Jonas M, Fang JC, Wang JC, et al. In-stent reste-
nosis and remote coronary lesion progression arecoupled in cardiac transplant vasculopathy but not innative coronary artery disease. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2006;48:453 –461.
15.Tremmel JA, Ng MK, Ikeno F, et al. Comparison
of drug-eluting versus bare metal stents in cardiac
allograft vasculopathy. Am J Cardiol . 2011;108:
665 –668.
16.Lee MS, Kobashigawa J, Tobis J. Comparison of
percutaneous coronary intervention with bare-metaland drug-eluting stents for cardiac allograft vascul-opathy. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv . 2008;1:710 –715.
9.8. Revascularization in Patients Before
Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement (TAVR)
1.Otto CM, Nishimura RA, Bonow RO, et al. 2020 ACC/
AHA guideline for the management of patients withvalvular heart disease: a report of the American Col-
lege of Cardiology/American Heart Association JointCommittee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2021;77:e25 –e197 .
9.9. Revascularization in Patients With Anomalous
Coronary Artery
1.Angelini P. Coronary artery anomalies: an entity in
search of an identity. Circulation . 2007;115:1296 –1305 .
2.Cheezum MK, Liberthson RR, Shah NR, et al.
Anomalous aortic origin of a coronary artery from theinappropriate sinus of valsalva. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2017;69:1592
–1608 .
3.Stout KK, Daniels CJ, Aboulhosn JA, et al. 2018
AHA/ACC guideline for the management of adults withcongenital heart disease: a report of the American
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task
Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2019;73:e81 –e192 .
10.1. Radial and Femoral Approaches for PCI
1.Romagnoli E, Biondi-Zoccai G, Sciahbasi A, et al.
Radial versus femoral randomized investigation inST-segment elevation acute coronary syndrome:the RIFLE-STEACS (Radial Versus Femoral Random-
ized Investigation in ST-Elevation Acute Coronary
Syndrome) study. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2012;60:2481 –
2489 .
2.Valgimigli M, Gagnor A, Calabró P, et al. Radial
versus femoral access in patients with acute coronarysyndromes undergoing invasive management: a rand-omised multicentre trial. Lancet . 2015;385:2465 –
2476 .
3.Andò G, Capodanno D. Radial versus femoral access
in invasively managed patients with acute coronary
syndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann
Intern Med . 2015;163:932 –940.
4.Ferrante G, Rao SV, Jüni P, et al. Radial versus
femoral access for coronary interventions across theentire spectrum of patients with coronary artery dis-ease: a meta-analysis of randomized trials. J Am Coll
Cardiol Intv . 2016;9:1419 –1434 .
5.Feldman DN, Swaminathan RV, Kaltenbach LA, et al.
Adoption of radial access and comparison of outcomesto femoral access in percutaneous coronary interven-
tion: an updated report from the national cardiovas-
cular data registry (2007-2012). Circulation . 2013;127:
2295 –2306 .
6.Louvard Y, Benamer H, Garot P, et al. Comparison of
transradial and transfemoral approaches for coronaryangiography and angioplasty in octogenarians (theOCTOPLUS study). Am J Cardiol . 2004;94:1177 –1180 .
7.Santas E, Bodi V, Sanchis J, et al. The left radial
approach in daily practice. A randomized study
comparing femoral and right and left radial ap-
proaches. Rev Esp Cardiol . 2009;62:482 –490.
8.Masoudi FA, Ponirakis A, de Lemos JA, et al. Trends
in U.S. cardiovascular care: 2016 report from 4 ACCnational cardiovascular data registries. J Am Coll Car-
diol. 2017;69:1427 –1450 .
9.Jolly SS, Yusuf S, Cairns J, et al. Radial versus
femoral access for coronary angiography and inter-
vention in patients with acute coronary syndromes(RIVAL): a randomised, parallel group, multicentretrial. Lancet . 2011;377:1409 –1420 .JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee107

10.Le May M, Wells G, So D, et al. Safety and ef ﬁcacy of
femoral access vs radial access in ST-segment elevationmyocardial infarction: the SAFARI-STEMI randomizedclinical trial. JAMA Cardiol . 2020;5:126 –134.
10.2. Choice of Stent Type
1.Piccolo R, Bonaa KH, Efthimiou O, et al. Drug-
eluting or bare-metal stents for percutaneous coro-nary intervention: a systematic review and individualpatient data meta-analysis of randomised clinical tri-als.Lancet . 2019;393:2503 –2510 .
2.Palmerini T, Benedetto U, Biondi-Zoccai G, et al.
Long-term safety of drug-eluting and bare-metalstents: evidence from a comprehensive networkmeta-analysis. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2015;65:2496 –2507 .
3.Kang SH, Park KW, Kang DY, et al. Biodegradable-
polymer drug-eluting stents vs. bare metal stents vs.
durable-polymer drug-eluting stents: a systematic
review and Bayesian approach network meta-analysis.Eur Heart J . 2014;35:1147 –1158.
4.Bangalore S, Toklu B, Amoroso N, et al. Bare metal
stents, durable polymer drug eluting stents, andbiodegradable polymer drug eluting stents for coro-nary artery disease: mixed treatment comparisonmeta-analysis. BMJ. 2013;347:f6625 .
5.Bavry AA, Kumbhani DJ, Helton TJ, et al. Late
thrombosis of drug-eluting stents: a meta-analysis ofrandomized clinical trials. Am J Med . 2006;119:1056 –
1061 .
6.Lagerqvist B, James SK, Stenestrand U, et al. Long-
term outcomes with drug-eluting stents versus bare-
metal stents in Sweden. N Engl J Med . 2007;356:
1009 –1019 .
7.Ong AT, McFadden EP, Regar E, et al. Late angio-
graphic stent thrombosis (LAST) events with drug-eluting stents. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2005;45:2088 –2092 .
8.Nordmann AJ, Briel M, Bucher HC. Mortality in
randomized controlled trials comparing drug-elutingvs. bare metal stents in coronary artery disease: ameta-analysis. Eur Heart J . 2006;27:2784 –2814 .
10.3. Use of Intravascular Imaging
1.Bavishi C, Sardar P, Chatterjee S, et al. Intravascular
ultrasound-guided vs angiography-guided drug-eluting stent implantation in complex coronary lesions:Meta-analysis of randomized trials. Am Heart J .
2017;185:26 –34.
2.Buccheri S, Franchina G, Romano S, et al. Clinical
outcomes following intravascular imaging-guidedversus coronary angiography-guided percutaneouscoronary intervention with stent implantation: a sys-
tematic review and Bayesian network meta-analysis of
31 studies and 17,882 patients. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv .
2017;10:2488 –2498 .
3.Elgendy IY, Mahmoud AN, Elgendy AY, et al. Out-
comes with intravascular ultrasound-guided stent im-plantation: a meta-analysis of randomized trials in theera of drug-eluting stents. Circ Cardiovasc Interv
.
2016;9:e003700 .
4.Hong S-J, Kim B-K, Shin D-H, et al. Effect of
intravascular ultrasound-guided vs angiography-guided everolimus-eluting stent implantation: the
IVUS-XPL randomized clinical trial. JAMA . 2015;314:
2155 –2163 .
5.Ladwiniec A, Walsh SJ, Holm NR, et al. Intravascular
ultrasound to guide left main stem intervention: aNOBLE trial substudy. EuroIntervention . 2020;16:201 –
209.
6.Zhang J, Gao X, Kan J, et al. Intravascular ultra-
sound versus angiography-guided drug-eluting stentimplantation: the ULTIMATE trial. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2018;72:3126 –3137.
7.Andell P, Karlsson S, Mohammad MA, et al. Intra-
vascular ultrasound guidance is associated with better
outcome in patients undergoing unprotected left main
coronary artery stenting compared with angiographyguidance alone. Circ Cardiovasc Interv . 2017;10:
e004813 .
8.Kim B-K, Shin D-H, Hong M-K, et al. Clinical impact
of intravascular ultrasound-guided chronic total oc-clusion intervention with zotarolimus-eluting versusbiolimus-eluting stent implantation: randomizedstudy. Circ Cardiovasc Interv . 2015;8:e002592 .
9.Witzenbichler B, Maehara A, Weisz G, et al. Rela-
tionship between intravascular ultrasound guidance
and clinical outcomes after drug-eluting stents: the
assessment of dual antiplatelet therapy with drug-eluting stents (ADAPT-DES) study. Circulation .
2014;129:463 –470.
10.Gao X-F, Ge Z, Kong X-Q, et al. 3-year outcomes of
the ULTIMATE trial comparing intravascular ultrasoundversus angiography-guided drug-eluting stent im-plantation. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv . 2021;14:247 –257.
11.Ali ZA, Maehara A, Généreux P, et al. Optical coher-
ence tomography compared with intravascular ultra-sound and with angiography to guide coronary stent
implantation (ILUMIEN III: OPTIMIZE PCI): a randomised
controlled trial. Lancet . 2016;388:2618 –2628 .
12.Meneveau N, Souteyrand G, Motreff P, et al. Op-
tical coherence tomography to optimize results ofpercutaneous coronary intervention in patients withnon-ST-elevation acute coronary syndrome: results ofthe multicenter, randomized DOCTORS study (DoesOptical Coherence Tomography Optimize Results of
Stenting). Circulation . 2016;134:906 –917.
13.Antonsen L, Thayssen P, Maehara A, et al. Optical
coherence tomography guided percutaneous coronary
intervention with nobori stent implantation in patientswith non-ST-segment-elevation myocardial infarction(OCTACS) trial: difference in strut coverage and dy-namic malapposition patterns at 6 months. Circ Car-
diovasc Interv . 2015;8:e002446 .
14.Dangas GD, Claessen BE, Caixeta A, et al. In-stent
restenosis in the drug-eluting stent era. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2010;56:1897 –1907 .
15.Fujii K, Mintz GS, Kobayashi Y, et al. Contribution of
stent underexpansion to recurrence after sirolimus-
eluting stent implantation for in-stent restenosis. Cir-
culation . 2004;109:1085 –1088 .
16.Choi S-Y, Witzenbichler B, Maehara A, et al.
Intravascular ultrasound ﬁndings of early stent
thrombosis after primary percutaneous intervention inacute myocardial infarction: a Harmonizing Outcomeswith Revascularization and Stents in Acute MyocardialInfarction (HORIZONS-AMI) substudy. Circ Cardiovasc
Interv . 2011;4:239 –247.
17.Souteyrand G, Amabile N, Mangin L, et al. Mecha-
nisms of stent thrombosis analysed by optical coher-
ence tomography: insights from the national PESTOFrench registry. Eur Heart J . 2016;37:1208 –1216 .
18.Steinberg DH, Mintz GS, Mandinov L, et al. Long-
term impact of routinely detected early and lateincomplete stent apposition: an integrated intravas-
cular ultrasound analysis of the TAXUS IV, V, and VIand TAXUS ATLAS workhorse, long lesion, and directstent studies. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv . 2010;3:486 –494.
19.Kobayashi N, Mintz GS, Witzenbichler B, et al.
Prevalence, features, and prognostic importance of
edge dissection after drug-eluting stent implantation:
an ADAPT-DES intravascular ultrasound substudy. Circ
Cardiovasc Interv . 2016;9:e003553 .
20.Maehara A, Matsumura M, Ali ZA, et al. IVUS-
guided versus OCT-guided coronary stent implanta-tion: a critical appraisal. J Am Coll Cardiol Img . 2017;10:
1487 –1503 .
21.Zhang Y-J, Pang S, Chen X-Y, et al. Comparison of
intravascular ultrasound guided versus angiographyguided drug eluting stent implantation: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. BMC Cardiovasc Disord .
2015;15:153 .
22.Nerlekar N, Cheshire CJ, Verma KP, et al. Intra-
vascular ultrasound guidance improves clinical out-comes during implantation of both ﬁrst- and second-
generation drug-eluting stents: a meta-analysis.EuroIntervention . 2017;12:1632 –1642 .
23.Ahn J-M, Kang S-J, Yoon S-H, et al. Meta-analysis
of outcomes after intravascular ultrasound-guided
versus angiography-guided drug-eluting stent im-
plantation in 26,503 patients enrolled in three ran-domized trials and 14 observational studies. Am J
Cardiol . 2014;113:1338 –1347 .
24.Kubo T, Shinke T, Okamura T, et al. Optical fre-
quency domain imaging vs. intravascular ultrasound inpercutaneous coronary intervention (OPINION trial):one-year angiographic and clinical results. Eur Heart J .
2017;38:3139 –3147 .
25.Prati F, Romagnoli E, Burzotta F, et al. Clinical
impact of OCT ﬁ
ndings during PCI: the CLI-OPCI II
study. J Am Coll Cardiol Img . 2015;8:1297 –1305 .
26.Soeda T, Uemura S, Park S-J, et al. Incidence and
clinical signi ﬁcance of poststent optical coherence
tomography ﬁndings: one-year follow-up study from a
multicenter registry. Circulation . 2015;132:1020 –1029 .
27.Holmes DR Jr, Kereiakes DJ, Garg S, et al. Stent
thrombosis. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2010;56:1357 –1365 .
28.Malle C, Tada T, Steigerwald K, et al. Tissue
characterization after drug-eluting stent implantationusing optical coherence tomography. Arterioscler
Thromb Vasc Biol . 2013;33:1376 –1383 .
29.Hassan AKM, Bergheanu SC, Stijnen T, et al. Late
stent malapposition risk is higher after drug-eluting
stent compared with bare-metal stent implantationand associates with late stent thrombosis. Eur Heart J .
2010;31:1172 –1180 .
30.Alfonso F, Sandoval J, Cárdenas A, et al. Optical
coherence tomography: from research to clinicalapplication. Minerva Med . 2012;103:441 –464.
31.Moses JW, Dangas G, Mehran R, et al. Drug-eluting
stents in the real world: how intravascular ultrasound
can improve clinical outcome. Am J Cardiol .
2008;102(9 suppl):24J –28J.
10.4. Thrombectomy
1.Fröbert O, Lagerqvist B, Olivecrona GK, et al.
Thrombus aspiration during ST-segment elevation
myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med . 2013;369:1587 –
1597 .Lawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e108

2.Jolly SS, Cairns JA, Yusuf S, et al. Randomized trial
of primary PCI with or without routine manualthrombectomy. N Engl J Med . 2015;372:1389 –1398 .
3.Jolly SS, Cairns JA, Yusuf S, et al. Outcomes after
thrombus aspiration for ST elevation myocardialinfarction: 1-year follow-up of the prospective rando-
mised TOTAL trial. Lancet . 2016;387:127 –135.
4.Lagerqvist B, Fröbert O, Olivecrona GK, et al. Out-
comes 1 year after thrombus aspiration for myocardial
infarction. N Engl J Med . 2014;371:1111 –1120 .
5.Stone GW, Maehara A, Witzenbichler B, et al.
Intracoronary abciximab and aspiration thrombectomy
in patients with large anterior myocardial infarction:the INFUSE-AMI randomized trial. JAMA . 2012;307:
1817 –1826 .
6.Ali A, Cox D, Dib N, et al. Rheolytic thrombectomy
with percutaneous coronary intervention for infarctsize reduction in acute myocardial infarction: 30-dayresults from a multicenter randomized study. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2006;48:244 –252.
7.Migliorini A, Stabile A, Rodriguez AE, et al. Com-
parison of AngioJet rheolytic thrombectomy before
direct infarct artery stenting with direct stenting alonein patients with acute myocardial infarction. The JET-STENT trial. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2010;56:1298 –1306 .
8.Sardella G, Mancone M, Bucciarelli-Ducci C, et al.
Thrombus aspiration during primary percutaneouscoronary intervention improves myocardial reperfusionand reduces infarct size: the EXPIRA (thrombectomywith export catheter in infarct-related artery during
primary percutaneous coronary intervention) pro-
spective, randomized trial. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2009;53:
309 –315.
9.Svilaas T, Vlaar PJ, van der Horst IC, et al. Thrombus
aspiration during primary percutaneous coronaryintervention. N Engl J Med . 2008;358:557 –567.
10.Vlaar PJ, Svilaas T, van der Horst IC, et al. Cardiac
death and reinfarction after 1 year in the ThrombusAspiration during Percutaneous coronary interventionin Acute myocardial infarction Study (TAPAS): a 1-year
follow-up study. Lancet . 2008;371:1915 –1920 .
11.Jolly SS, James S, D /C20zavík V, et al. Thrombus aspi-
ration in ST-segment-elevation myocardial infarction:
an individual patient meta-analysis: ThrombectomyTrialists Collaboration. Circulation . 2017;135:143 –152.
10.5. Treatment of Calci ﬁed Lesions
1.Abdel-Wahab M, Richardt G, Joachim Büttner H,
et al. High-speed rotational atherectomy beforepaclitaxel-eluting stent implantation in complexcalciﬁed coronary lesions: the randomized ROTAXUS
(Rotational Atherectomy Prior to Taxus Stent Treat-
ment for Complex Native Coronary Artery Disease)trial. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv . 2013;6:10 –19.
2.Abdel-Wahab M, Toelg R, Byrne RA, et al. High-
speed rotational atherectomy versus modi ﬁed bal-
loons prior to drug-eluting stent implantation inseverely calci ﬁed coronary lesions. Circ Cardiovasc
Interv . 2018;11:e007415 .
3.Bittl JA, Chew DP, Topol EJ, et al. Meta-analysis of
randomized trials of percutaneous transluminal coro-nary angioplasty versus atherectomy, cutting balloon
atherotomy, or laser angioplasty. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2004;43:936 –942.
4.Parikh K, Chandra P, Choksi N, et al. Safety and
feasibility of orbital atherectomy for the treatment ofcalciﬁed coronary lesions: the ORBIT I trial. Catheter
Cardiovasc Interv . 2013;81:1134 –1139.
5.Chambers JW, Feldman RL, Himmelstein SI, et al.
Pivotal trial to evaluate the safety and ef ﬁcacy of the
orbital atherectomy system in treating de novo,severely calci ﬁed coronary lesions (ORBIT II). J Am Coll
Cardiol Intv . 2014;7:510 –518.
6.Albiero R, Silber S, Di Mario C, et al. Cutting balloon
versus conventional balloon angioplasty for thetreatment of in-stent restenosis: results of the reste-nosis cutting balloon evaluation trial (RESCUT). JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2004;43:943 –949.
7.Kufner S, Joner M, Schneider S, et al. Neointimal
modiﬁcation with scoring balloon and ef ﬁcacy of drug-
coated balloon therapy in patients with restenosis indrug-eluting coronary stents: a randomized controlled
trial. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv . 2017;10:1332 –1340 .
8.Kereiakes DJ, Di Mario C, Riley RF, et al. Intravas-
cular lithotripsy for treatment of calci ﬁed coronary
lesions: patient-level pooled analysis of the disrupt
CAD studies. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv . 2021;14:1337 –
1348 .
9.Mehanna E, Abbott JD, Bezerra HG. Optimizing
percutaneous coronary intervention in calci ﬁed le-
sions: insights from optical coherence tomography of
atherectomy. Circ Cardiovasc Interv . 2018;11:e006813 .
10.
Bittl JA. Role of adjunctive devices —atherectomy,
cutting balloon, and laser. In: Topol EJ, Teirstein PS,
eds. Textbook of Interventional Cardiology . 8th ed.
Elsevier Inc; 2019:577 –589.
11.Bittl JA. Physical aspects of excimer laser angio-
plasty for undilatable lesions. Catheter Cardiovasc
Interv . 2008;71:808 –809.
12.Latib A, Takagi K, Chizzola G, et al. Excimer laser
lesion modi ﬁcation to expand non-dilatable stents: the
ELLEMENT registry. Cardiovasc Revasc Med . 2014;15:
8–12.
13.Lee T, Shlofmitz RA, Song L, et al. The effective-
ness of excimer laser angioplasty to treat coronary in-
stent restenosis with peri-stent calcium as assessed by
optical coherence tomography. EuroIntervention .
2019;15:e279 –e288 .
14.Noble S, Bilodeau L. High energy excimer laser to
treat coronary in-stent restenosis in an underexpanded
stent. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv . 2008;71:803 –807.
15.Ali ZA, Nef H, Escaned J, et al. Safety and effec-
tiveness of coronary intravascular lithotripsy for
treatment of severely calci ﬁed coronary stenoses: the
Disrupt CAD II study. Circ Cardiovasc Interv . 2019;12:
e008434 .
10.6. Treatment of Saphenous Vein Graft (SVG)
Disease (Previous CABG)
1.Baim DS, Wahr D, George B, et al. Randomized trial
of a distal embolic protection device during percuta-
neous intervention of saphenous vein aorto-coronary
bypass grafts. Circulation . 2002;105:1285 –1290 .
2.Stone GW, Rogers C, Hermiller J, et al. Randomized
comparison of distal protection with a ﬁlter-based
catheter and a balloon occlusion and aspiration sys-
tem during percutaneous intervention of diseasedsaphenous vein aorto-coronary bypass grafts. Circula-
tion. 2003;108:548 –553.
3.Valle JA, Glorioso TJ, Schuetze KB, et al. Contem-
porary use of embolic protection devices duringsaphenous vein graft intervention. Circ Cardiovasc
Interv . 2019;12:e007636 .
4.Brilakis ES, Rao SV, Banerjee S, et al. Percutaneous
coronary intervention in native arteries versus bypass
grafts in prior coronary artery bypass grafting patients:a report from the National Cardiovascular Data Reg-istry. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv
. 2011;4:844 –850.
5.Brilakis ES, O ’Donnell CI, Penny W, et al. Percuta-
neous coronary intervention in native coronary arteries
versus bypass grafts in patients with prior coronary
artery bypass graft surgery: insights from the VeteransAffairs Clinical Assessment, Reporting, and TrackingProgram. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv . 2016;9:884 –893.
6.Hoffmann R, Hamm C, Nienaber CA, et al. Implan-
tation of sirolimus-eluting stents in saphenous vein
grafts is associated with high clinical follow-up eventrates compared with treatment of native vessels.Coron Artery Dis . 2007;18:559 –564.
7.Al-Lamee R, Ielasi A, Latib A, et al. Clinical and
angiographic outcomes after percutaneous recanali-
zation of chronic total saphenous vein graft occlusion
using modern techniques. Am J Cardiol . 2010;106:
1721 –1727.
8.de Feyter PJ, Serruys P, van den Brand M, et al.
Percutaneous transluminal angioplasty of a totallyoccluded venous bypass graft: a challenge that should
be resisted. Am J Cardiol . 1989;64:88 –90.
9.de Vries MR, Simons KH, Jukema JW, et al. Vein
graft failure: from pathophysiology to clinical out-comes. Nat Rev Cardiol . 2016;13:451 –470.
10.Redfors B, Généreux P, Witzenbichler B, et al.
Percutaneous coronary intervention of saphenous veingraft. Circ Cardiovasc Interv . 2017;10:e004953 .
11.Brennan JM, Al-Hejily W, Dai D, et al. Three-year
outcomes associated with embolic protection insaphenous vein graft intervention: results in 49 325
senior patients in the Medicare-linked National Car-
diovascular Data Registry CathPCI Registry. Circ Car-
diovasc Interv . 2015;8:e001403 .
12.Shoaib A, Kinnaird T, Curzen N, et al. Outcomes
following percutaneous coronary intervention in
saphenous vein grafts with and without embolic pro-
tection devices. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv . 2019;12:2286 –
2295 .
13.Paul TK, Bhatheja S, Panchal HB, et al. Outcomes of
saphenous vein graft intervention with and withoutembolic protection device: a comprehensive review
and meta-analysis. Circ Cardiovasc Interv . 2017;10:
e005538 .
10.7. Treatment of CTO
1.Lee SW, Lee PH, Ahn JM, et al. Randomized trial
evaluating percutaneous coronary intervention for the
treatment of chronic total occlusion. Circulation .
2019;139:1674 –1683 .
2.Werner GS, Martin-Yuste V, Hildick-Smith D, et al.
A randomized multicentre trial to compare revascu-larization with optimal medical therapy for the treat-
ment of chronic total coronary occlusions. Eur Heart J
.
2018;39:2484 –2493 .
3.Obedinskiy AA, Kretov EI, Boukhris M, et al. The
IMPACTOR-CTO trial. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv . 2018;11:
1309 –1311.
4.Henriques JP, Hoebers LP, Råmunddal T, et al.
Percutaneous intervention for concurrent chronic totalJACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee109

occlusions in patients with STEMI: the EXPLORE trial.
J Am Coll Cardiol . 2016;68:1622 –1632 .
5.Fefer P, Knudtson ML, Cheema AN, et al. Current
perspectives on coronary chronic total occlusions: theCanadian Multicenter Chronic Total Occlusions Regis-
try.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2012;59:991 –997.
6.Tsai TT, Stanislawski MA, Shunk KA, et al.
Contemporary incidence, management, and long-termoutcomes of percutaneous coronary interventions forchronic coronary artery total occlusions: insights fromthe VA CART Program. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv . 2017;10:
866 –875.
7.Tajti P, Burke MN, Karmpaliotis D, et al. Prevalence
and outcomes of percutaneous coronary interventions
for ostial chronic total occlusions: insights from amulticenter chronic total occlusion registry. Can J
Cardiol . 2018;34:1264 –1274 .
8.Sapontis J, Salisbury AC, Yeh RW, et al. Early
procedural and health status outcomes after chronictotal occlusion angioplasty: a report from theOPEN-CTO Registry (Outcomes, Patient Health Sta-
tus, and Ef ﬁciency in Chronic Total Occlusion Hybrid
Procedures). J Am Coll Cardiol Intv . 2017;10:1523 –
1534 .
9.Stone GW, Reifart NJ, Moussa I, et al. Percutaneous
recanalization of chronically occluded coronary ar-teries: a consensus document: part II. Circulation .
2005;112:2530 –2537 .
10.Mashayekhi K, Nührenberg TG, Toma A, et al.
A randomized trial to assess regional left ventricular
function after stent implantation in chronic total oc-clusion: the REVASC trial. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv .
2018;11:1982 –1991 .
11.Abo-Aly M, Misumida N, Backer N, et al. Percuta-
neous coronary intervention with drug-eluting stentversus optimal medical therapy for chronic total oc-
clusion: systematic review and meta-analysis. Angiol-
ogy. 2019;70:908 –915.
12.Li KHC, Wong KHG, Gong M, et al. Percutaneous
coronary intervention versus medical therapy forchronic total occlusion of coronary arteries: a sys-tematic review and meta-analysis. Curr Atheroscler
Rep. 2019;21:42 .
13.Christiansen E. ISCHEMIA-CTO Trial - Revascular-
isation or Optimal Medical Therapy of CTO (ISCHEMIA-
CTO). 2018. Accessed August 15, 2019. Available athttps://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03563417?term ¼03563417&rank ¼1
14.Minneapolis Heart Institute Foundation. The SHINE-
CTO Trial (SHINE-CTO). 2016. Accessed August 15,2019. Available at https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/results?
cond ¼&term ¼02784418&cntry ¼&state
¼&city ¼&
dist¼
10.8. Treatment of Patients With Stent Restenosis
1.Siontis GC, Stefanini GG, Mavridis D, et al. Percuta-
neous coronary interventional strategies for treatmentof in-stent restenosis: a network meta-analysis. Lan-
cet. 2015;386:655 –664.
2.Giacoppo D, Gargiulo G, Aruta P, et al. Treatment
strategies for coronary in-stent restenosis: systematicreview and hierarchical Bayesian network meta-analysis of 24 randomised trials and 4880 patients.
BMJ. 2015;351:h5392 .
3.Mehilli J, Byrne RA, Tiroch K, et al. Randomized trial
of paclitaxel- versus sirolimus-eluting stents fortreatment of coronary restenosis in sirolimus-eluting
stents: the ISAR-DESIRE 2 (Intracoronary Stentingand Angiographic Results: Drug Eluting Stents for In-Stent Restenosis 2) study. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2010;55:2710 –2716 .
4.Kastrati A, Mehilli J, von Beckerath N, et al.
Sirolimus-eluting stent or paclitaxel-eluting stentvs balloon angioplasty for prevention of re-currences in patients with coronary in-stentrestenosis: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA .
2005;293:165 –171.
5.Negi SI, Torguson R, Gai J, et al. Intracoronary
brachytherapy for recurrent drug-eluting stent failure.
J Am Coll Cardiol Intv . 2016;9:1259 –1265 .
6.Tada T, Byrne RA, Simunovic I, et al. Risk of stent
thrombosis among bare-metal stents, ﬁrst-generation
drug-eluting stents, and second-generation drug-eluting stents: results from a registry of 18,334 pa-tients. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv . 2013;6:1267 –1274 .
7.Alfonso F, Fernandez C. Second-generation drug-
eluting stents. Moving the ﬁeld forward. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2011;58:26 –29.
8.Gada H, Kirtane AJ, Newman W, et al. 5-year results
of a randomized comparison of XIENCE V everolimus-eluting and TAXUS paclitaxel-eluting stents: ﬁnal re-
sults from the SPIRIT III trial (clinical evaluation of the
XIENCE V everolimus eluting coronary stent system in
the treatment of patients with de novo native coronaryartery lesions). J Am Coll Cardiol Intv . 2013;6:1263 –
1266 .
9.Dangas GD, Claessen BE, Caixeta A, et al. In-stent
restenosis in the drug-eluting stent era. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2010;56:1897 –1907 .
10.Alfonso F, Byrne RA, Rivero F, et al. Current
treatment of in-stent restenosis. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2014;63:2659 –
2673 .
11.Mehran R, Dangas G, Abizaid AS, et al. Angio-
graphic patterns of in-stent restenosis: classi ﬁcation
and implications for long-term outcome. Circulation .
1999;100:1872 –1878 .
12.Goto K, Zhao Z, Matsumura M, et al. Mechanisms
and patterns of intravascular ultrasound in-stent
restenosis among bare metal stents and ﬁrst- and
second-generation drug-eluting stents. Am J Cardiol .
2015;116:1351 –1357 .
13.Kang SJ, Mintz GS, Park DW, et al. Mechanisms of
in-stent restenosis after drug-eluting stent implanta-tion: intravascular ultrasound analysis. Circ Cardiovasc
Interv . 2011;4:9 –14.
14.Farb A, Sangiorgi G, Carter AJ, et al. Pathology of
acute and chronic coronary stenting in humans. Cir-
culation . 1999;99:44 –52.
15.Singh M, Gersh BJ, McClelland RL, et al. Clinical
and angiographic predictors of restenosis afterpercutaneous coronary intervention: insights from the
Prevention of Restenosis With Tranilast and Its Out-
comes (PRESTO) trial. Circulation . 2004;109:2727 –
2731 .
16.Stolker JM, Kennedy KF, Lindsey JB, et al. Pre-
dicting restenosis of drug-eluting stents placed in real-world clinical practice: derivation and validation of arisk model from the EVENT registry. Circ Cardiovasc
Interv . 2010;3:327 –334.
17.Dibra A, Kastrati A, Alfonso F, et al. Effectiveness
of drug-eluting stents in patients with bare-metal in-stent restenosis: meta-analysis of randomized trials.
J Am Coll Cardiol . 2007;49:616 –623.
10.9. Hemodynamic Support for Complex PCI
1.Perera D, Stables R, Thomas M, et al. Elective intra-
aortic balloon counterpulsation during high-riskpercutaneous coronary intervention: a randomizedcontrolled trial. JAMA . 2010;304:867 –874.
2.O’Neill WW, Kleiman NS, Moses J, et al.
A prospective, randomized clinical trial of hemody-namic support with Impella 2.5 versus intra-aorticballoon pump in patients undergoing high-risk percu-
taneous coronary intervention: the PROTECT II study.
Circulation . 2012;126:1717 –1727.
3.Amin AP, Spertus JA, Curtis JP, et al. The evolving
landscape of Impella use in the United States among
patients undergoing percutaneous coronary interven-
tion with mechanical circulatory support. Circulation .
2020;141:273
–284.
4.Dhruva SS, Ross JS, Mortazavi BJ, et al. Association
of use of an intravascular microaxial left ventricular
assist device vs intra-aortic balloon pump with in-hospital mortality and major bleeding among pa-tients with acute myocardial infarction complicated bycardiogenic shock. JAMA . 2020;323:734 –745.
5.Baumann S, Werner N, Ibrahim K, et al. Indication
and short-term clinical outcomes of high-risk percu-taneous coronary intervention with microaxialImpella /C226pump: results from the German Impella /C226
registry. Clin Res Cardiol . 2018;107:653 –657.
6.Curtis JP, Rathore SS, Wang Y, et al. Use and
effectiveness of intra-aortic balloon pumps amongpatients undergoing high risk percutaneous coronaryintervention: insights from the National Cardiovascular
Data Registry. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes . 2012;5:
21–30.
7.Maini B, Naidu SS, Mulukutla S, et al. Real-world use
of the Impella 2.5 circulatory support system in com-
plex high-risk percutaneous coronary intervention: the
USpella Registry. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv . 2012;80:
717–725.
8.Rihal CS, Naidu SS, Givertz MM, et al. 2015 SCAI/
ACC/HFSA/STS clinical expert consensus statement on
the use of percutaneous mechanical circulatory sup-port devices in cardiovascular care. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2015;65:e7 –e26.
9.Vetrovec GW, Anderson M, Schreiber T, et al. The
cVAD registry for percutaneous temporary hemody-namic support: a prospective registry of Impella me-chanical circulatory support use in high-risk PCI,cardiogenic shock, and decompensated heart failure.Am Heart J . 2018;199:115 –121.
11.1. Aspirin and Oral P2Y12 Inhibitors in Patients
Undergoing PCI
1.Barnathan ES, Schwartz JS, Taylor L, et al. Aspirin
and dipyridamole in the prevention of acute coronary
thrombosis complicating coronary angioplasty. Circu-
lation . 1987;76:125 –134.
2.Antithrombotic Trialists ’Collaboration. Collabora-
tive meta-analysis of randomised trials of anti-
platelet therapy for prevention of death, myocardial
infarction, and stroke in high risk patients. BMJ.
2002;324:71 –86.
3.Collaborative overview of randomised trials of an-
tiplatelet therapy –I: prevention of death, myocardial
infarction, and stroke by prolonged antiplateletLawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e110

therapy in various categories of patients. Antiplatelet
Trialists ’Collaboration. BMJ . 1994;308:81 –106.
4.Baigent C, Blackwell L, Collins R, et al. Aspirin in the
primary and secondary prevention of vascular disease:collaborative meta-analysis of individual participant
data from randomised trials. Antithrombotic Trialists ’
(ATT) Collaboration. Lancet . 2009;373:1849 –1860 .
5.Sabatine MS, Cannon CP, Gibson CM, et al. Effect of
clopidogrel pretreatment before percutaneous coro-nary intervention in patients with ST-elevationmyocardial infarction treated with ﬁbrinolytics: the
PCI-CLARITY study. JAMA . 2005;294:1224 –1232 .
6.Wiviott SD, Braunwald E, McCabe CH, et al. Prasu-
grel versus clopidogrel in patients with acute coronarysyndromes. N Engl J Med . 2007;357:2001 –2015 .
7.Montalescot G, van ’t Hof AW, Lapostolle F, et al.
Prehospital ticagrelor in ST-segment elevationmyocardial infarction. N Engl J Med . 2014;371:1016 –
1027 .
8.Taniuchi M, Kurz HI, Lasala JM. Randomized com-
parison of ticlopidine and clopidogrel after intra-
coronary stent implantation in a broad patientpopulation. Circulation . 2001;104:539 –543.
9.Bellemain-Appaix A, O ’Connor SA, Silvain J, et al.
Association of clopidogrel pretreatment with mortal-ity, cardiovascular events, and major bleeding amongpatients undergoing percutaneous coronary interven-
tion: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA .
2012;308:2507 –2516 .
10.Schömig A, Neumann FJ, Kastrati A, et al.
A randomized comparison of antiplatelet and antico-agulant therapy after the placement of coronary-artery stents. N Engl J Med . 1996;334:1084 –1089 .
11.Leon MB, Baim DS, Popma JJ, et al. A clinical trial
comparing three antithrombotic-drug regimens after
coronary-artery stenting. Stent AnticoagulationRestenosis Study Investigators. N Engl J Med .
1998;339:1665 –1671.
12.Moussa I, Oetgen M, Roubin G, et al. Effectiveness
of clopidogrel and aspirin versus ticlopidine and aspirinin preventing stent thrombosis after coronary stent
implantation. Circulation . 1999;99:2364 –2366 .
13.Calver AL, Blows LJ, Harmer S, et al. Clopidogrel
for prevention of major cardiac events after coronarystent implantation: 30-day and 6-month results inpatients with smaller stents. Am Heart J
. 2000;140:
483 –491.
14.Wallentin L, Becker RC, Budaj A, et al. Ticagrelor
versus clopidogrel in patients with acute coronary
syndromes. N Engl J Med . 2009;361:1045 –1057 .
15.Müller C, Büttner HJ, Petersen J, et al.
A randomized comparison of clopidogrel and aspirinversus ticlopidine and aspirin after the placement ofcoronary-artery stents. Circulation . 2000;101:590 –
593.
16.Bertrand ME, Rupprecht HJ, Urban P, et al. Dou-
ble-blind study of the safety of clopidogrel with and
without a loading dose in combination with aspirincompared with ticlopidine in combination with aspirinafter coronary stenting: the clopidogrel aspirin stentinternational cooperative study (CLASSICS). Circula-
tion. 2000;102:624 –629.
17.Di Sciascio G, Patti G, Pasceri V, et al. Effectiveness
of in-laboratory high-dose clopidogrel loading versus
routine pre-load in patients undergoing percutaneouscoronary intervention: results of the ARMYDA-5 PRE-
LOAD (Antiplatelet therapy for Reduction of MYocar-dial Damage during Angioplasty) randomized trial.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2010;56:550 –557.
18.Steinhubl SR, Berger PB, Mann JT 3rd, et al. Early
and sustained dual oral antiplatelet therapy followingpercutaneous coronary intervention: a randomizedcontrolled trial. JAMA . 2002;288:2411 –2420 .
19.von Beckerath N, Taubert D, Pogatsa-Murray G,
et al. Absorption, metabolization, and antiplatelet ef-
fects of 300-, 600-, and 900-mg loading doses of
clopidogrel: results of the ISAR-CHOICE (IntracoronaryStenting and Antithrombotic Regimen: Choose Be-tween 3 High Oral Doses for Immediate ClopidogrelEffect) trial. Circulation . 2005;112:2946 –2950 .
20.Montalescot G, Wiviott SD, Braunwald E, et al.
Prasugrel compared with clopidogrel in patients un-
dergoing percutaneous coronary intervention for ST-elevation myocardial infarction (TRITON-TIMI 38):double-blind, randomised controlled trial. Lancet .
2009;373:723 –731.
21.Berwanger O, Nicolau JC, Carvalho AC, et al. Tica-
grelor vs clopidogrel after ﬁbrinolytic therapy in pa-
tients with ST-elevation myocardial infarction: arandomized clinical trial. JAMA Cardiol . 2018;3:391 –
399.
22.Widimsky P, Motovská Z, Simek S, et al. Clopi-
dogrel pre-treatment in stable angina: for all patients
>6 h before elective coronary angiography or only for
angiographically selected patients a few minutesbefore PCI? A randomized multicentre trial PRAGUE-8.Eur Heart J . 2008;29:1495 –1503 .
23.Schwartz L, Bourassa MG, Lespérance J, et al.
Aspirin and dipyridamole in the prevention of reste-
nosis after percutaneous transluminal coronary an-
gioplasty. N Engl J Med . 1988;318:1714 –1719.
24.Jolly SS, Pogue J, Haladyn K, et al. Effects of
aspirin dose on ischaemic events and bleeding afterpercutaneous coronary intervention: insights from thePCI-CURE study. Eur Heart J . 2009;30:900 –907.
25.Serebruany VL, Steinhubl SR, Berger PB, et al.
Analysis of risk of bleeding complications afterdifferent doses of aspirin in 192,036 patients enrolledin 31 randomized controlled trials. Am J Cardiol .
2005;95:1218 –1222 .
26.Mahaffey KW, Wojdyla DM, Carroll K, et al. Tica-
grelor compared with clopidogrel by geographic re-gion in the Platelet Inhibition and Patient Outcomes(PLATO) trial. Circulation . 2011;124:544 –554.
27.Nordt SP, Clark RF, Castillo EM, et al. Comparison
of three aspirin formulations in human volunteers.
West J Emerg Med . 2011;12:381 –385.
28.Dörler J, Edlinger M, Alber HF, et al. Clopidogrel
pre-treatment is associated with reduced in-hospitalmortality in primary percutaneous coronary interven-tion for acute ST-elevation myocardial infarction. Eur
Heart J . 2011;32:2954 –2961 .
29.Zeymer U, Arntz H-R, Mark B, et al. Ef ﬁcacy and
safety of a high loading dose of clopidogrel adminis-tered prehospitally to improve primary percutaneouscoronary intervention in acute myocardial infarction:the randomized CIPAMI trial. Clin Res Cardiol .
2012;101:305 –312.
30.Montalescot G, Bolognese L, Dudek D, et al. Pre-
treatment with prasugrel in non-ST-segment elevationacute coronary syndromes. N Engl J Med . 2013;369:
999 –1010 .
31.Tarantini G, Mojoli M, Varbella F, et al. Timing of
Oral P2Y12 Inhibitor administration in patients withnon-ST-segment elevation acute coronary syndrome.
J Am Coll Cardiol . 2020;76:2450 –2459 .
32.Gimbel M, Qaderdan K, Willemsen L, et al. Clopi-
dogrel versus ticagrelor or prasugrel in patients aged70 years or older with non-ST-elevation acute coro-nary syndrome (POPular AGE): the randomised, open-label, non-inferiority trial. Lancet . 2020;395:1374 –
1381.
33.Dehghani P, Lavoie A, Lavi S, et al. Effects of
ticagrelor versus clopidogrel on platelet function inﬁbrinolytic-treated STEMI patients undergoing early
PCI. Am Heart J . 2017;192:105 –112.
34.Mehta SR, Yusuf S, Peters RJ, et al. Effects of
pretreatment with clopidogrel and aspirin followed by
long-term therapy in patients undergoing percuta-
neous coronary intervention: the PCI-CURE study.Lancet . 2001;358:527 –533.
35.Menichelli M, Neumann F-J, Ndrepepa G, et al.
Age- and weight-adapted dose of prasugrel versus
standard dose of ticagrelor in patients with acutecoronary syndromes: results from a randomized trial.
Ann Intern Med . 2020;173:436 –444.
36.Stone GW, Grines CL, Cox DA, et al. Comparison of
angioplasty with stenting, with or without abciximab,in acute myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med .
2002;346:957 –966.
37.Giugliano RP, White JA, Bode C, et al. Early versus
delayed, provisional epti ﬁbatide in acute coronary
syndromes. N Engl J Med . 2009;360:2176 –2190 .
38.Valgimigli M, Campo G, Percoco G, et al. Com-
parison of angioplasty with infusion of tiro ﬁban or
abciximab and with implantation of sirolimus-elutingor uncoated stents for acute myocardial infarction:the MULTISTRATEGY randomized trial. JAMA .
2008;299:1788 –1799 .
39.Bhatt DL, Stone GW, Mahaffey KW, et al. Effect of
platelet inhibition with cangrelor during PCI onischemic events. N Engl J Med . 2013;368:1303 –1313.
11.2. Intravenous P2Y12 Inhibitors in Patients
Undergoing PCI
1.Bhatt DL, Lincoff AM, Gibson CM, et al. Intravenous
platelet blockade with cangrelor during PCI. N Engl J
Med. 2009;361:2330 –2341 .
2.Bhatt DL, Stone GW, Mahaffey KW, et al. Effect of
platelet inhibition with cangrelor during PCI onischemic events. N Engl J Med . 2013;368:1303 –1313.
3.Steg PG, Bhatt DL, Hamm CW, et al. Effect of can-
grelor on periprocedural outcomes in percutaneous
coronary interventions: a pooled analysis of patient-level data. Lancet . 2013;382:1981 –1992 .
4.Harrington RA, Stone GW, McNulty S, et al. Platelet
inhibition with cangrelor in patients undergoing PCI.N Engl J Med . 2009;361:2318 –2329 .
11.3. Intravenous Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa Inhibitors in
Patients Undergoing PCI
1.Stone GW, Maehara A, Witzenbichler B, et al.
Intracoronary abciximab and aspiration thrombectomy
in patients with large anterior myocardial infarction:JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee111

the INFUSE-AMI randomized trial. JAMA . 2012;307:
1817 –1826 .
2.Montalescot G, Barragan P, Wittenberg O, et al.
Platelet glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibition with coronary
stenting for acute myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med .
2001;344:1895 –1903 .
3.Kastrati A, Mehilli J, Schühlen H, et al. A clinical trial
of abciximab in elective percutaneous coronary inter-vention after pretreatment with clopidogrel. N Engl J
Med. 2004;350:232 –238.
4.O’Shea JC, Ha ﬂey GE, Greenberg S, et al. Platelet
glycoprotein IIb/IIIa integrin blockade with epti ﬁbatide
in coronary stent intervention: the ESPRIT trial: arandomized controlled trial. JAMA . 2001;285:2468 –
2473 .
5.Espirit Investigators. Enhanced Suppression of the
Platelet IIb/IIIa Receptor with Integrilin Therapy. Noveldosing regimen of epti ﬁbatide in planned coronary
stent implantation (ESPRIT): a randomised, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet . 2000;356:2037 –2044 .
6.Platelet Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa in Unstable Angina:
Receptor Suppression Using Integrilin Therapy (PUR-
SUIT) Trial Investigators. Inhibition of platelet glyco-protein IIb/IIIa with epti ﬁbatide in patients with acute
coronary syndromes. N Engl J Med . 1998;339:436 –
443.
7.Kastrati A, Neumann FJ, Schulz S, et al. Abciximab
and heparin versus bivalirudin for non-ST-elevation
myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med . 2011;365:1980 –
1989 .
8.Stone GW, Grines CL, Cox DA, et al. Comparison of
angioplasty with stenting, with or without abciximab,in acute myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med .
2002;346:957 –966.
9.Moser M, Bertram U, Peter K, et al. Abciximab,
eptiﬁbatide, and tiro ﬁban exhibit dose-dependent
potencies to dissolve platelet aggregates.J Cardiovasc Pharmacol . 2003;41:586 –592.
11.4. Heparin, Low-Molecular-Weight Heparin,
and Bivalirudin in Patients Undergoing PCI
1.Lewis BE, Matthai WH Jr, Cohen M, et al. Argatroban
anticoagulation during percutaneous coronary inter-vention in patients with heparin-induced thrombocy-topenia. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv . 2002;57:177
–184.
2.Mahaffey KW, Lewis BE, Wildermann NM, et al. The
anticoagulant therapy with bivalirudin to assist in theperformance of percutaneous coronary intervention inpatients with heparin-induced thrombocytopenia(ATBAT) study: main results. J Invasive Cardiol .
2003;15:611 –616.
3.Kastrati A, Neumann FJ, Mehilli J, et al. Bivalirudin
versus unfractionated heparin during percutaneouscoronary intervention. N Engl J Med . 2008;359:688 –
696.
4.Lincoff AM, Bittl JA, Harrington RA, et al. Bivalir-
udin and provisional glycoprotein IIb/IIIa blockade
compared with heparin and planned glycoprotein IIb/
IIIa blockade during percutaneous coronary interven-tion: REPLACE-2 randomized trial. JAMA . 2003;289:
853–863.
5.Stone GW, White HD, Ohman EM, et al. Bivalirudin in
patients with acute coronary syndromes undergoing
percutaneous coronary intervention: a subgroup anal-
ysis from the Acute Catheterization and UrgentIntervention Triage strategy (ACUITY) trial. Lancet .
2007;369:907 –919.
6.Kastrati A, Neumann FJ, Schulz S, et al. Abciximab
and heparin versus bivalirudin for non-ST-elevationmyocardial infarction. N Engl J Med . 2011;365:1980 –
1989 .
7.Valgimigli M, Gagnor A, Calabró P, et al. Radial
versus femoral access in patients with acute coronarysyndromes undergoing invasive management: a rand-omised multicentre trial. Lancet . 2015;385:2465 –
2476 .
8.Steg PG, van ’t Hof A, Hamm CW, et al. Bivalirudin
started during emergency transport for primary PCI.
N Engl J Med . 2013;369:2207 –2217 .
9.Stone GW, Witzenbichler B, Guagliumi G, et al.
Bivalirudin during primary PCI in acute myocardialinfarction. N Engl J Med . 2008;358:2218 –2230 .
10.Capodanno D, Gargiulo G, Capranzano P, et al.
Bivalirudin versus heparin with or without glycoproteinIIb/IIIa inhibitors in patients with STEMI undergoing
primary PCI: an updated meta-analysis of 10,350 pa-
tients from ﬁve randomized clinical trials. Eur Heart J
Acute Cardiovasc Care . 2016;5:253 –262.
11.Cavender MA, Sabatine MS. Bivalirudin versus
heparin in patients planned for percutaneous coronaryintervention: a meta-analysis of randomised controlledtrials. Lancet . 2014;384:599 –606.
12.Shah R, Latham SB, Porta JM, et al. Bivalirudin with
a post-procedure infusion versus heparin monotherapy
for the prevention of stent thrombosis. Catheter Car-
diovasc Interv . 2019;94:210 –215.
13.Blazing MA, De Lemos JA, Dyke CK, et al. The A-to-
Z Trial: methods and rationale for a single trial inves-tigating combined use of low-molecular-weight hep-
arin with the glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitor tiro ﬁban
and de ﬁning the ef ﬁcacy of early aggressive simva-
statin therapy. Am Heart J . 2001;142:211 –217.
14.Ferguson JJ, Califf RM, Antman EM, et al. Enox-
aparin vs unfractionated heparin in high-risk patientswith non-ST-segment elevation acute coronary syn-dromes managed with an intended early invasive
strategy: primary results of the SYNERGY randomized
trial. JAMA . 2004;292:45 –54.
15.Montalescot G, Zeymer U, Silvain J, et al. Intrave-
nous enoxaparin or unfractionated heparin in primarypercutaneous coronary intervention for ST-elevationmyocardial infarction: the international randomisedopen-label ATOLL trial. Lancet . 2011;378:693 –703.
16.Silvain J, Beygui F, Barthelemy O, et al. Ef ﬁcacy
and safety of enoxaparin versus unfractionated heparin
during percutaneous coronary intervention: systematicreview and meta-analysis. BMJ. 2012;344:e553 .
17.Montalescot G, White HD, Gallo R, et al. Enox-
aparin versus unfractionated heparin in electivepercutaneous coronary intervention. N Engl J Med .
2006;355:1006 –1017 .
18.Drouet L, Bal dit Sollier C, Martin J. Adding intra-
venous unfractionated heparin to standard enoxaparincauses excessive anticoagulation not detected byactivated clotting time: results of the STACK-on toENOXaparin (STACKENOX) study. Am Heart J .
2009;158:177 –184.
19.Cohen M, Mahaffey KW, Pieper K, et al. A subgroup
analysis of the impact of prerandomization anti-
thrombin therapy on outcomes in the SYNERGY trial:enoxaparin versus unfractionated heparin in non-ST-
segment elevation acute coronary syndromes. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2006;48:1346 –1354 .
20.Yusuf S, Mehta SR, Chrolavicius S, et al. Compari-
son of fondaparinux and enoxaparin in acute coronarysyndromes. N Engl J Med . 2006;354:1464 –1476 .
21.Yusuf S, Mehta SR, Chrolavicius S, et al. Effects of
fondaparinux on mortality and reinfarction in patients
with acute ST-segment elevation myocardial infarc-tion: the OASIS-6 randomized trial. JAMA . 2006;295:
1519 –1530 .
22.Rao SC, Chhatriwalla AK, Kennedy KF, et al. Pre-
procedural estimate of individualized bleeding risk
impacts physicians ’utilization of bivalirudin during
percutaneous coronary intervention. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2013;61:1847 –1852 .
23.Bittl JA, Strony J, Brinker JA, et al. Treatment with
bivalirudin (Hirulog) as compared with heparin during
coronary angioplasty for unstable or postinfarctionangina. Hirulog Angioplasty Study Investigators.N Engl J Med . 1995;333:764 –769.
24.Ferguson JJ, Dougherty KG, Gaos CM, et al. Rela-
tion between procedural activated coagulation timeand outcome after percutaneous transluminal coronaryangioplasty. J Am Coll Cardiol . 1994;23:1061 –1065 .
25.McGarry TF Jr, Gottlieb RS, Morganroth J, et al.
The relationship of anticoagulation level and compli-
cations after successful percutaneous transluminal
coronary angioplasty. Am Heart J . 1992;123:1445 –1451.
26.Narins CR, Hillegass WB Jr, Nelson CL, et al.
Relation between activated clotting time during an-gioplasty and abrupt closure. Circulation . 1996;93:
667 –671.
27.Brener SJ, Moliterno DJ, Lincoff AM, et al. Rela-
tionship between activated clotting time and ischemicor hemorrhagic complications: analysis of 4 recentrandomized clinical trials of percutaneous coronary
intervention. Circulation . 2004;110:994 –998.
28.Mottillo S, Filion KB, Joseph L, et al. De ﬁning
optimal activated clotting time for percutaneous cor-onary intervention: a systematic review and Bayesianmeta-regression. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv . 2017;89:
351–366.
29.Schulz S, Angiolillo DJ, Antoniucci D, et al. Ran-
domized comparison of ticagrelor versus prasugrel inpatients with acute coronary syndrome and planned
invasive strategy –design and rationale of the iNtra-
coronary Stenting and Antithrombotic Regimen: RapidEarly Action for Coronary Treatment (ISAR-REACT) 5trial. J Cardiovasc Transl Res . 2014;7:91 –100.
30.Tolleson TR, O ’Shea JC, Bittl JA, et al. Relationship
between heparin anticoagulation and clinical outcomesin coronary stent intervention: observations from theESPRIT trial. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2003;41:386 –393.
31.Montalescot G, Cohen M, Salette G, et al. Impact of
anticoagulation levels on outcomes in patients un-
dergoing elective percutaneous coronary intervention:
insights from the STEEPLE trial. Eur Heart J . 2008;29:
462 –471.
32.Fabris E, Kilic S, Van
’t Hof AWJ, et al. One-year
mortality for bivalirudin vs heparins plus optionalglycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitor treatment started in theambulance for ST-segment elevation myocardialinfarction: a secondary analysis of the EUROMAX
randomized clinical trial. JAMA Cardiol . 2017;2:791 –
796.Lawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e112

33.Han Y, Guo J, Zheng Y, et al. Bivalirudin vs heparin
with or without tiro ﬁban during primary percutaneous
coronary intervention in acute myocardial infarction:the BRIGHT randomized clinical trial. JAMA . 2015;313:
1336 –1346 .
34.Mehran R, Lansky AJ, Witzenbichler B, et al.
Bivalirudin in patients undergoing primary angioplasty
for acute myocardial infarction (HORIZONS-AMI): 1-year results of a randomised controlled trial. Lancet .
2009;374:1149 –1159 .
35.Schulz S, Richardt G, Laugwitz KL, et al. Compari-
son of prasugrel and bivalirudin vs clopidogrel andheparin in patients with ST-segment elevationmyocardial infarction: Design and rationale of the
Bavarian Reperfusion Alternatives Evaluation (BRAVE)
4 trial. Clin Cardiol . 2014;37:270 –276.
36.Shahzad A, Kemp I, Mars C, et al. Unfractionated
heparin versus bivalirudin in primary percutaneouscoronary intervention (HEAT-PPCI): an open-label,single centre, randomised controlled trial. Lancet .
2014;384:1849 –1858 .
37.Stone GW, Clayton T, Deliargyris EN, et al.
Reduction in cardiac mortality with bivalirudin in pa-tients with and without major bleeding: the
HORIZONS-AMI trial (Harmonizing Outcomes with
Revascularization and Stents in Acute MyocardialInfarction). J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;63:15 –20.
38.Erlinge D, Omerovic E, Frobert O, et al. Bivalirudin
versus heparin monotherapy in myocardial infarction.N Engl J Med . 2017;377:1132 –1142.
39.Choussat R, Montalescot G, Collet JP, et al.
A unique, low dose of intravenous enoxaparin inelective percutaneous coronary intervention. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2002;40:1943 –1950 .
40.Chew DP, Bhatt DL, Lincoff AM, et al. De ﬁning the
optimal activated clotting time during percutaneous
coronary intervention: aggregate results from 6 ran-domized, controlled trials. Circulation . 2001;103:961 –
966.
41.Boccara A, Benamer H, Juliard JM, et al.
A randomized trial of a ﬁxed high dose vs a
weight-adjusted low dose of intravenous heparinduring coronary angioplasty. Eur Heart J . 1997;18:
631–635.
42.Schulz S, Mehilli J, Neumann FJ, et al. ISAR-REACT
3A: a study of reduced dose of unfractionated heparin
in biomarker negative patients undergoing percuta-neous coronary intervention. Eur Heart J . 2010;31:
2482 –2491 .
43.
Gibson CM, Murphy SA, Montalescot G, et al.
Percutaneous coronary intervention in patientsreceiving enoxaparin or unfractionated heparin afterﬁbrinolytic therapy for ST-segment elevation
myocardial infarction in the ExTRACT-TIMI 25 trial.
J Am Coll Cardiol . 2007;49:2238 –2246 .
44.Levine GN, Ferrando T. Degree of anticoagulation
after one subcutaneous and one subsequent intrave-nous booster dose of enoxaparin: implications for pa-tients with acute coronary syndromes undergoingearly percutaneous coronary intervention. J Thromb
Thrombolysis . 2004;17:167 –171.
45.Martin JL, Fry ET, Sanderink GJ, et al.
Reliable anticoagulation with enoxaparin in patients
undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention:the pharmacokinetics of enoxaparin in PCI (PEPCI)study. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv . 2004;61:163 –170.12.1. Perioperative Considerations in Patients
Undergoing CABG
1.Grant MC, Isada T, Ruzankin P, et al. Results from an
enhanced recovery program for cardiac surgery.
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2020;159:1393 –1402.e7 .
2.Williams JB, McConnell G, Allender JE, et al. One-
year results from the ﬁrst US-based enhanced recovery
after cardiac surgery (ERAS Cardiac) program. J Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg . 2019;157:1881 –1888 .
3.Li M, Zhang J, Gan TJ, et al. Enhanced recovery after
surgery pathway for patients undergoing cardiac sur-
gery: a randomized clinical trial. Eur J Cardiothorac
Surg. 2018;54:491 –497.
4.Hillis LD, Smith PK, Anderson JL, et al. 2011 ACCF/
AHA guideline for coronary artery bypass graft sur-gery: a report of the American College of CardiologyFoundation/American Heart Association Task Force onPractice Guidelines. Developed in collaboration withthe American Association for Thoracic Surgery, Society
of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists, and Society of
Thoracic Surgeons. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2011;58:e123 –
e210 .
5.Silbert BS, Scott DA, Evered LA, et al. A comparison
of the effect of high- and low-dose fentanyl on theincidence of postoperative cognitive dysfunction aftercoronary artery bypass surgery in the elderly. Anes-
thesiology . 2006;104:1137 –1145.
6.Ender J, Borger MA, Scholz M, et al. Cardiac surgery
fast-track treatment in a postanesthetic care unit: six-month results of the Leipzig fast-track concept.Anesthesiology . 2008;109:61 –66.
7.Myles PS, Daly DJ, Djaiani G, et al. A systematic
review of the safety and effectiveness of fast-trackcardiac anesthesia. Anesthesiology . 2003;99:982 –987.
8.Wong W-T, Lai VK, Chee YE, et al. Fast-track cardiac
care for adult cardiac surgical patients. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev . 2016;9:CD003587 .
9.
Borde DP, Futane SS, Asegaonkar B, et al. Effect of
perioperative pregabalin on postoperative quality ofrecovery in patients undergoing Off-Pump CoronaryArtery Bypass Grafting (OPCABG): a prospective, ran-domized, double-blind trial. J Cardiothorac Vasc
Anesth . 2017;31:1241 –1245 .
10.Jelacic S, Bollag L, Bowdle A, et al. Intravenous
acetaminophen as an adjunct analgesic in cardiac sur-
gery reduces opioid consumption but not opioid-
related adverse effects: a randomized controlledtrial. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth . 2016;30:997 –1004 .
11.Joshi SS, Jagadeesh AM. Ef ﬁcacy of perioperative
pregabalin in acute and chronic post-operative painafter off-pump coronary artery bypass surgery: a ran-domized, double-blind placebo controlled trial. Ann
Card Anaesth . 2013;16:180 –185.
12.Khalil MA, Abdel Azeem MS. The impact of dex-
medetomidine infusion in sparing morphine con-sumption in off-pump coronary artery bypass grafting.Semin Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth . 2013;17:66 –71.
13.Lahtinen P, Kokki H, Hakala T, et al. S( þ)-ketamine
as an analgesic adjunct reduces opioid consumptionafter cardiac surgery. Anesth Analg . 2004;99:1295 –
1301 .
14.Menda F, Köner O, Say ın M, et al. Effects of single-
dose gabapentin on postoperative pain and morphineconsumption after cardiac surgery. J Cardiothorac Vasc
Anesth . 2010;24:808 –813.
15.Subramaniam B, Shankar P, Shae ﬁS, et al. Effect of
intravenous acetaminophen vs placebo combined withpropofol or dexmedetomidine on postoperativedelirium among older patients following cardiac sur-
gery: the DEXACET randomized clinical trial. JAMA .
2019;321:686 –696.
16.Grant MC, Isada T, Ruzankin P, et al. Opioid-sparing
cardiac anesthesia: secondary analysis of an enhancedrecovery program for cardiac surgery. Anesth Analg .
2020;131:1852 –1861 .
17.Landoni G, Biondi-Zoccai GGL, Zangrillo A, et al.
Desﬂurane and sevo ﬂurane in cardiac surgery: a meta-
analysis of randomized clinical trials. J Cardiothorac
Vasc Anesth . 2007;21:502 –511.
18.Landoni G, Greco T, Biondi-Zoccai G, et al. Anaes-
thetic drugs and survival: a Bayesian network meta-
analysis of randomized trials in cardiac surgery. Br J
Anaesth . 2013;111:886 –
896.
19.Landoni G, Guarracino F, Cariello C, et al. Volatile
compared with total intravenous anaesthesia in pa-tients undergoing high-risk cardiac surgery: a ran-domized multicentre study. Br J Anaesth . 2014;113:
955–963.
20.Landoni G, Lomivorotov VV, Nigro Neto C, et al.
Volatile anesthetics versus total intravenous anes-
thesia for cardiac surgery. N Engl J Med . 2019;380:
1214 –1225 .
21.Symons JA, Myles PS. Myocardial protection with
volatile anaesthetic agents during coronary arterybypass surgery: a meta-analysis. Br J Anaesth .
2006;97:127 –136.
22.Zamani MM, Naja ﬁA, Sehat S, et al. The effect of
intraoperative lung protective ventilation vs conven-tional ventilation, on postoperative pulmonary com-plications after cardiopulmonary bypass. J Cardiovasc
Thorac Res . 2017;9:221 –228.
23.Zochios V, Klein AA, Gao F. Protective invasive
ventilation in cardiac surgery: a systematic review witha focus on acute lung injury in adult cardiac surgicalpatients. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth . 2018;32:1922 –
1936 .
24.Sundar S, Novack V, Jervis K, et al. In ﬂuence of low
tidal volume ventilation on time to extubation in car-diac surgical patients. Anesthesiology . 2011;114:1102 –
1110.
25.Yang D, Grant MC, Stone A, et al. A meta-analysis
of intraoperative ventilation strategies to prevent
pulmonary complications: is low tidal volume alonesufﬁcient to protect healthy lungs? Ann Surg .
2016;263:881 –887.
26.Aya HD, Cecconi M, Hamilton M, et al. Goal-
directed therapy in cardiac surgery: a systematic re-view and meta-analysis. Br J Anaesth . 2013;110:510 –
517.
27.Li P, Qu L-P, Qi D, et al. Signi ﬁcance of perioper-
ative goal-directed hemodynamic approach in pre-
venting postoperative complications in patients aftercardiac surgery: a meta-analysis and systematic re-view. Ann Med . 2017;49:343 –351.
28.Kihara C, Murata K, Wada Y, et al. Impact of
intraoperative transesophageal echocardiography incardiac and thoracic aortic surgery: experience in 1011
cases. J Cardiol . 2009;54:282 –288.JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee113

29.Savage RM, Lytle BW, Aronson S, et al. Intra-
operative echocardiography is indicated in high-riskcoronary artery bypass grafting. Ann Thorac Surg .
1997;64:368 –373. discussion 73-4 .
30.Eltzschig HK, Rosenberger P, Löf ﬂer M, et al.
Impact of intraoperative transesophageal echocardi-ography on surgical decisions in 12,566 patients un-dergoing cardiac surgery. Ann Thorac Surg . 2008;85:
845 –852.
31.Qaddoura FE, Abel MD, Mecklenburg KL, et al. Role
of intraoperative transesophageal echocardiography inpatients having coronary artery bypass graft surgery.
Ann Thorac Surg . 2004;78:1586 –1590 .
32.Swaminathan M, Morris RW, De Meyts DD, et al.
Deterioration of regional wall motion immediately af-
ter coronary artery bypass graft surgery is associated
with long-term major adverse cardiac events. Anes-
thesiology . 2007;107:739 –745.
33.Swaminathan M, Nicoara A, Phillips-Bute BG, et al.
Utility of a simple algorithm to grade diastolic
dysfunction and predict outcome after coronary arterybypass graft surgery. Ann Thorac Surg . 2011;91:1844 –
1850 .
34.Suehiro K, Tanaka K, Yamada T, et al. The utility of
intra-operative three-dimensional transoesophagealechocardiography for dynamic measurement of strokevolume. Anaesthesia . 2015;70:150 –159.
35.Aggarwal N, Unnikrishnan KP, Biswas I, et al.
Intraoperative assessment of transient and persistentregional left ventricular wall motion abnormalities inpatients undergoing coronary revascularization surgeryusing real time three-dimensional transesophagealechocardiography: a prospective observational study.
Echocardiography . 2017;34:1649 –1659 .
36.Chiang Y, Hosseinian L, Rhee A, et al. Questionable
beneﬁt of the pulmonary artery catheter after cardiac
surgery in high-risk patients. J Cardiothorac Vasc
Anesth . 2015;29:76 –81.
37.Schwann TA, Zacharias A, Riordan CJ, et al. Safe,
highly selective use of pulmonary artery catheters in
coronary artery bypass grafting: an objective patient
selection method. Ann Thorac Surg . 2002;73:1394 –
1401. discussion 401-2 .
38.Schwann NM, Hillel Z, Hoeft A, et al. Lack of
effectiveness of the pulmonary artery catheter in car-
diac surgery. Anesth Analg . 2011;113:994 –1002 .
39.Ramsey SD, Saint S, Sullivan SD, et al. Clinical and
economic effects of pulmonary artery catheterization
in nonemergent coronary artery bypass graft surgery.J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth . 2000;14:113 –
118.
40.Resano FG, Kapetanakis EI, Hill PC, et al. Clinical
outcomes of low-risk patients undergoing beating-
heart surgery with or without pulmonary artery cath-eterization. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth . 2006;20:300 –
306.
41.Zorrilla-Vaca A, Healy R, Grant MC, et al. Intra-
operative cerebral oximetry-based management foroptimizing perioperative outcomes: a meta-analysis ofrandomized controlled trials. Can J Anaesth . 2018;65:
529–542.
42.Colak Z, Borojevic M, Bogovic A, et al. In ﬂuence of
intraoperative cerebral oximetry monitoring on neu-rocognitive function after coronary artery bypasssurgery: a randomized, prospective study. Eur J Car-
diothorac Surg . 2015;47:447 –454.
43.Vretzakis G, Georgopoulou S, Stamoulis K, et al.
Monitoring of brain oxygen saturation (INVOS) in aprotocol to direct blood transfusions during cardiacsurgery: a prospective randomized clinical trial.J Cardiothorac Surg . 2013;8:145 .
44.Kara I, Erkin A, Sacl ıH, et al. The effects of near-
infrared spectroscopy on the neurocognitive func-tions in the patients undergoing coronary arterybypass grafting with asymptomatic carotid artery dis-ease: a randomized prospective study. Ann Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg . 2015;21:544 –550.
45.Rogers CA, Stoica S, Ellis L, et al. Randomized trial
of near-infrared spectroscopy for personalized opti-
mization of cerebral tissue oxygenation during cardiac
surgery. Br J Anaesth . 2017;119:384 –393.
46.Uysal S, Lin H-M, Trinh M, et al. Optimizing cere-
bral oxygenation in cardiac surgery: a randomized
controlled trial examining neurocognitive and periop-
erative outcomes. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2020;159:
943 –953.e3 .
47.Deschamps A, Hall R, Grocott H, et al. Cerebral
oximetry monitoring to maintain normal cerebral ox-
ygen saturation during high-risk cardiac surgery: arandomized controlled feasibility trial. Anesthesiology .
2016;124:826 –836.
48.Kertai MD, Pal N, Palanca BJA, et al. Association of
perioperative risk factors and cumulative duration oflow bispectral index with intermediate-term mortalityafter cardiac surgery in the B-Unaware Trial. Anes-
thesiology . 2010;112:1116 –1127.
49.Vance JL, Shanks AM, Woodrum DT. Intraoperative
bispectral index monitoring and time to extubationafter cardiac surgery: secondary analysis of a ran-domized controlled trial. BMC Anesthesiol . 2014;14:79 .
50.Villafranca A, Thomson IA, Grocott HP, et al. The
impact of bispectral index versus end-tidal anestheticconcentration-guided anesthesia on time to trachealextubation in fast-track cardiac surgery. Anesth Analg .
2013;116:541 –
548.
51.Vretzakis G, Ferdi E, Argiriadou H, et al. In ﬂuence
of bispectral index monitoring on decision makingduring cardiac anesthesia. J Clin Anesth . 2005;17:509 –
516.
12.2. Bypass Conduits in Patients Undergoing CABG
1.Gaudino M, Benedetto U, Fremes S, et al. Radial-
artery or saphenous-vein grafts in coronary-arterybypass surgery. N Engl J Med . 2018;378:2069 –2077 .
2.Cao C, Manganas C, Horton M, et al. Angiographic
outcomes of radial artery versus saphenous vein in
coronary artery bypass graft surgery: a meta-analysisof randomized controlled trials. J Thorac Cardiovasc
Surg. 2013;146:255 –261.
3.Gaudino M, Lorusso R, Rahouma M, et al. Radial
artery versus right internal thoracic artery versussaphenous vein as the second conduit for coronaryartery bypass surgery: a network meta-analysis ofclinical outcomes. J Am Heart Assoc . 2019;8:e010839 .
4.Zeff RH, Kongtahworn C, Iannone LA, et al. Internal
mammary artery versus saphenous vein graft to theleft anterior descending coronary artery: prospectiverandomized study with 10-year follow-up. Ann Thorac
Surg. 1988;45:533 –536.
5.Boylan MJ, Lytle BW, Loop FD, et al. Surgical
treatment of isolated left anterior descending coro-nary stenosis. Comparison of left internal mammaryartery and venous autograft at 18 to 20 years of
follow-up. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 1994;107:657 –
662.
6.Loop FD, Lytle BW, Cosgrove DM, et al. In ﬂuence of
the internal-mammary-artery graft on 10-year survivaland other cardiac events. N Engl J Med . 1986;314:1 –6.
7.Cameron A, Davis KB, Green G, et al. Coronary
bypass surgery with internal-thoracic-artery grafts –
effects on survival over a 15-year period. N Engl J Med .
1996;334:216 –219.
8.Tatoulis J, Buxton BF, Fuller JA. The right internal
thoracic artery: the forgotten conduit –5,766 patients
and 991 angiograms. Ann Thorac Surg . 2011;92:9 –15.
discussion-7 .
9.Magruder JT, Young A, Grimm JC, et al. Bilateral
internal thoracic artery grafting: does graft con ﬁgu-
ration affect outcome? J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg .
2016;152:120 –127.
10.Yi G, Shine B, Rehman SM, et al. Effect of bilateral
internal mammary artery grafts on long-term survival:a meta-analysis approach. Circulation . 2014;130:539 –
545.
11.Takagi H, Goto SN, Watanabe T, et al. A meta-
analysis of adjusted hazard ratios from 20 observa-
tional studies of bilateral versus single internalthoracic artery coronary artery bypass grafting.J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2014;148:1282 –1290 .
12.Taggart DP, Benedetto U, Gerry S, et al. Bilateral
versus single internal-thoracic-artery grafts at 10years. N Engl J Med . 2019;380:437 –446.
13.Gaudino M, Benedetto U, Fremes S, et al. Associ-
ation of radial artery graft vs saphenous vein graft withlong-term cardiovascular outcomes among patients
undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting: a sys-
tematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA . 2020;324:
179–187.
14.Benedetto U, Raja SG, Albanese A, et al. Searching
for the second best graft for coronary artery bypasssurgery: a network meta-analysis of randomizedcontrolled trials. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg . 2015;47:59 –
65.
15.Abu-Omar Y, Mussa S, Anastasiadis K, et al. Duplex
ultrasonography predicts safety of radial artery har-
vest in the presence of an abnormal Allen test. Ann
Thorac Surg . 2004;77:116 –119.
16.Gaudino M, Di Franco A, Rahouma M, et al. Un-
measured confounders in observational studiescomparing bilateral versus single internal thoracic ar-tery for coronary artery bypass grafting: a meta-analysis. J Am Heart Assoc . 2018;7:e008010 .
17.Schwann TA, Habib RH, Wallace A, et al. Operative
outcomes of multiple-arterial versus single-arterial
coronary bypass grafting. Ann Thorac Surg . 2018;105:
1109 –1119.
18.Gaudino M, Puskas JD, Di Franco A, et al. Three
arterial grafts improve late survival: a meta-analysis ofpropensity-matched studies. Circulation . 2017;135:
1036 –1044 .Lawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e114

19.Yanagawa B, Verma S, Mazine A, et al. Impact of
total arterial revascularization on long term survival: asystematic review and meta-analysis of 130,305 pa-tients. Int J Cardiol . 2017;233:29 –36.
12.3. CABG in Patients Undergoing Other Cardiac
Surgery
1.Abel NJ, Rogal GJ, Burns P, et al. Aortic valve
replacement with and without coronary artery bypass
graft surgery in octogenarians: is it safe and feasible?Cardiology . 2013;124:163 –173.
2.Agarwal S, Garg A, Parashar A, et al. In-hospital
mortality and stroke after surgical aortic valvereplacement: a nationwide perspective. J Thorac Car-
diovasc Surg . 2015;150:571 –578.e8 .
3.Biancari F, Martin M, Bordin G, et al. Basic data from
176 studies on the immediate outcome after aorticvalve replacement with or without coronary arterybypass surgery. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth . 2014;28:
1251 –1256 .
4.Carnero-Alcázar M, Reguillo-Lacruz F, Alswies A,
et al. Short- and mid-term results for aortic valve
replacement in octogenarians. Interact Cardiovasc
Thorac Surg . 2010;10:549 –554.
5.Di Gioia G, Pellicano M, Toth GG, et al. Clinical
outcome of patients with aortic stenosis and coronaryartery disease not treated according to current recom-mendations. J Cardiovasc Transl Res . 2016;9:145 –152.
6.Roberts WC, Roberts CC, Vowels TJ, et al. Effect of
coronary bypass and valve structure on outcome inisolated valve replacement for aortic stenosis. Am J
Cardiol . 2012;109:1334 –1340 .
7.Beach JM, Mihaljevic T, Svensson LG, et al. Coronary
artery disease and outcomes of aortic valve replace-ment for severe aortic stenosis. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2013;61:837 –848.
8.Shan L, Saxena A, McMahon R, et al. A systematic
review on the quality of life bene ﬁts after aortic valve
replacement in the elderly. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg .
2013;145:1173 –1189 .
9.Vasques F, Lucenteforte E, Paone R, et al. Outcome
of patients aged $80 years undergoing combined
aortic valve replacement and coronary artery bypassgrafting: a systematic review and meta-analysis of 40studies. Am Heart J . 2012;164:410 –418.e1 .
10.Thalji NM, Suri RM, Daly RC, et al. The prognostic
impact of concomitant coronary artery bypass graftingduring aortic valve surgery: implications for revascu-
larization in the transcatheter era. J Thorac Cardiovasc
Surg
. 2015;149:451 –460.
11.Yamanaka K, Komiya T, Tsuneyoshi H, et al. Out-
comes of Concomitant Total Aortic Arch Replacement
with Coronary Artery Bypass Grafting. Ann Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg . 2016;22:251 –257.
12.Li Z, Anderson I, Amsterdam EA, et al. Effect of
coronary artery disease extent on contemporary out-comes of combined aortic valve replacement andcoronary artery bypass graft surgery. Ann Thorac Surg .
2013;96:2075 –2082 .
12.4. Use of Epiaortic Ultrasound in Patients
Undergoing CABG
1.Biancari F, Santini F, Tauriainen T, et al. Epiaortic
ultrasound to prevent stroke in coronary artery bypassgrafting. Ann Thorac Surg . 2020;109:294 –301.
2.Yamaguchi A, Adachi H, Tanaka M, et al. Ef ﬁcacy of
intraoperative epiaortic ultrasound scanning forpreventing stroke after coronary artery bypass sur-
gery. Ann Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2009;15:98 –104.
3.Das S, Dunning J. Can epiaortic ultrasound reduce
the incidence of intraoperative stroke during cardiacsurgery? Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg . 2004;3:71 –
75.
4.Djaiani G, Ali M, Borger MA, et al. Epiaortic scanning
modiﬁes planned intraoperative surgical management
but not cerebral embolic load during coronary arterybypass surgery. Anesth Analg . 2008;106:1611 –1618 .
5.Gold JP, Torres KE, Maldarelli W, et al. Improving
outcomes in coronary surgery: the impact of echo-directed aortic cannulation and perioperative hemo-dynamic management in 500 patients. Ann Thorac
Surg. 2004;78:1579 –1585 .
6.Joo HC, Youn YN, Kwak YL, et al. Intraoperative
epiaortic scanning for preventing early stroke after
off-pump coronary artery bypass. Br J Anaesth .
2013;111:374 –381.
7.Lyons JM, Thourani VH, Puskas JD, et al. Intra-
operative epiaortic ultrasound scanning guides opera-tive strategies and identi ﬁes patients at high risk
during coronary artery bypass grafting. Innovations
(Phila) . 2009;4:99 –105.
8.Nakamura M, Okamoto F, Nakanishi K, et al. Does
intensive management of cerebral hemodynamics and
atheromatous aorta reduce stroke after coronary ar-tery surgery? Ann Thorac Surg . 2008;85:513
–519.
9.Rosenberger P, Shernan SK, Löf ﬂer M, et al. The
inﬂuence of epiaortic ultrasonography on intra-
operative surgical management in 6051 cardiac surgi-cal patients. Ann Thorac Surg . 2008;85:548 –553.
10.Zingone B, Rauber E, Gatti G, et al. The impact of
epiaortic ultrasonographic scanning on the risk of
perioperative stroke. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg .
2006;29:720 –728.
11.Blauth CI, Cosgrove DM, Webb BW, et al. Athe-
roembolism from the ascending aorta. An emergingproblem in cardiac surgery. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg .
1992;103:1104 –1111. discussion 11-2 .
12.Dávila-Román VG, Barzilai B, Wareing TH, et al.
Atherosclerosis of the ascending aorta. Prevalence androle as an independent predictor of cerebrovascular
events in cardiac patients. Stroke . 1994;25:2010 –2016 .
13.Bolotin G, Domany Y, de Perini L, et al. Use of
intraoperative epiaortic ultrasonography to delineate
aortic atheroma. Chest . 2005;127:60 –65.
14.Suvarna S, Smith A, Stygall J, et al. An intra-
operative assessment of the ascending aorta: a com-parison of digital palpation, transesophagealechocardiography, and epiaortic ultrasonography.J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth . 2007;21:805 –809.
15.Sylivris S, Cala ﬁore P, Matalanis G, et al. The
intraoperative assessment of ascending aortic
atheroma: epiaortic imaging is superior to both trans-
esophageal echocardiography and direct palpation.J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth . 1997;11:704 –707.
16.Hangler HB, Nagele G, Danzmayr M, et al. Modi ﬁ-
cation of surgical technique for ascending aorticatherosclerosis: impact on stroke reduction in coronaryartery bypass grafting. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg .
2003;126:391 –400.
17.Meissner I, Khandheria BK, Sheps SG, et al.
Atherosclerosis of the aorta: risk factor, risk marker, or
innocent bystander? A prospective population-basedtransesophageal echocardiography study. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2004;44:1018 –1024 .
18.Hogue CW Jr, Murphy SF, Schechtman KB, et al.
Risk factors for early or delayed stroke after cardiacsurgery. Circulation . 1999;100:642 –647.
19.Roach GW, Kanchuger M, Mangano CM, et al.
Adverse cerebral outcomes after coronary bypass
surgery. Multicenter Study of Perioperative Ischemia
Research Group and the Ischemia Research and Edu-cation Foundation Investigators. N Engl J Med .
1996;335:1857 –1863 .
20.Djaiani G, Fedorko L, Borger M, et al. Mild to
moderate atheromatous disease of the thoracic aortaand new ischemic brain lesions after conventionalcoronary artery bypass graft surgery. Stroke . 2004;35:
e356 –e358 .
21.Schachner T, Zimmer A, Nagele G, et al. The in-
ﬂuence of ascending aortic atherosclerosis on the
long-term survival after CABG. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg .
2005;28:558 –562.
22.Dávila-Román VG, Phillips KJ, Daily BB, et al.
Intraoperative transesophageal echocardiography andepiaortic ultrasound for assessment of atherosclerosisof the thoracic aorta. J Am Coll Cardiol . 1996;28:942 –
947.
23.Royse C, Royse A, Blake D, et al. Screening the
thoracic aorta for atheroma: a comparison of manual
palpation, transesophageal and epiaortic ultrasonog-
raphy. Ann Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 1998;4:347 –350.
24.Van Zaane B, Zuithoff NP, Reitsma JB, et al. Meta-
analysis of the diagnostic accuracy of transesophagealechocardiography for assessment of atherosclerosis inthe ascending aorta in patients undergoing cardiacsurgery. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand . 2008;52:1179 –1187.
12.5. Use of Cardiopulmonary Bypass in Patients
Undergoing CABG
1.Lamy A, Devereaux PJ, Prabhakaran D, et al. Off-
pump or on-pump coronary-artery bypass grafting at
30 days. N Engl J Med . 2012;366:1489 –1497 .
2.Smart NA, Dieberg G, King N. Long-term outcomes
of on- versus off-pump coronary artery bypass graft-ing. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2018;71:983 –991.
3.Al-Ruzzeh S, George S, Bustami M, et al. Effect of
off-pump coronary artery bypass surgery on clinical,angiographic, neurocognitive, and quality of life out-comes: randomised controlled trial. BMJ. 2006;332:
1365 .
4.Angelini GD, Taylor FC, Reeves BC, et al. Early and
midterm outcome after off-pump and on-pump sur-
gery in Beating Heart Against Cardioplegic Arrest
Studies (BHACAS 1 and 2): a pooled analysis of tworandomised controlled trials. Lancet . 2002;359:1194 –
1199 .
5.Houlind K, Kjeldsen BJ, Madsen SN, et al. On-pump
versus off-pump coronary artery bypass surgery inelderly patients: results from the Danish on-pumpversus off-pump randomization study. Circulation .
2012;125:2431 –2439
.
6.Lamy A, Devereaux PJ, Prabhakaran D, et al. Effects
of off-pump and on-pump coronary-artery bypassgrafting at 1 year. N Engl J Med . 2013;368:1179 –1188 .
7.Nathoe HM, van Dijk D, Jansen EW, et al.
A comparison of on-pump and off-pump coronarybypass surgery in low-risk patients. N Engl J Med .
2003;348:394 –402.JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee115

8.Puskas JD, Williams WH, Duke PG, et al. Off-
pump coronary artery bypass grafting providescomplete revascularizat ion with reduced myocar-
dial injury, transfusion requirements, and length
of stay: a prospective randomized comparison of
two hundred unselected patients undergoing off-pump versus conventional coronary artery bypassgrafting. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2003;125:797 –
808 .
9.Houlind K, Fenger-Gron M, Holme SJ, et al. Graft
patency after off-pump coronary artery bypass surgeryis inferior even with identical heparinization protocols:
results from the Danish On-pump Versus Off-pump
Randomization Study (DOORS). J Thorac Cardiovasc
Surg. 2014;148:1812 –1819.e2 .
10.Hueb W, Lopes NH, Pereira AC, et al. Five-year
follow-up of a randomized comparison between off-pump and on-pump stable multivessel coronary ar-tery bypass grafting. The MASS III Trial. Circulation .
2010;122:S48 –S52.
11.Moller CH, Perko MJ, Lund JT, et al. No major dif-
ferences in 30-day outcomes in high-risk patientsrandomized to off-pump versus on-pump coronarybypass surgery: the best bypass surgery trial. Circula-
tion. 2010;121:498 –504.
12.Diegeler A, Börgermann J, Kappert U, et al. Five-
year outcome after off-pump or on-pump coronaryartery bypass grafting in elderly patients. Circulation .
2019;139:1865 –1871.
13.Garg AX, Devereaux PJ, Yusuf S, et al. Kidney
function after off-pump or on-pump coronary arterybypass graft surgery: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA .
2014;311:2191 –2198 .
14.Noiseux N, Stevens L, Chartrand-Lefebvre C, et al.
Evaluation of graft patency in off-pump versus on-pump CABG: the PATENCY-CORONARY trial. Can J
Cardiol . 2015;31(Suppl):S110 .
15.Deppe A-C, Arbash W, Kuhn EW, et al. Current
evidence of coronary artery bypass grafting off-pumpversus on-pump: a systematic review with meta-analysis of over 16,900 patients investigated in ran-domized controlled trials. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg .
2016;49:1031 –1041. discussion 41 .
16.Edelman JJ, Yan TD, Bannon PG, et al. Coronary
artery bypass grafting with and without manipulation
of the ascending aorta –a meta-analysis. Heart Lung
Circ. 2011;20:318 –324.
17.Lamy A, Devereaux PJ, Prabhakaran D, et al. Five-
year outcomes after off-pump or on-pump coronary-artery bypass grafting. N Engl J Med . 2016;375:2359 –
2368 .
18.Shroyer AL, Hattler B, Wagner TH, et al. Five-year
outcomes after on-pump and off-pump coronary-ar-
tery bypass. N Engl J Med . 2017;377:623
–632.
19.Takagi H, Matsui M, Umemoto T. Off-pump coro-
nary artery bypass may increase late mortality: a meta-analysis of randomized trials. Ann Thorac Surg .
2010;89:1881 –1888 .
20.Møller CH, Penninga L, Wetterslev J, et al. Off-
pump versus on-pump coronary artery bypass graftingfor ischaemic heart disease. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev. 2012;3:CD007224 .
21.Kuss O, von Salviati B, Börgermann J. Off-pump
versus on-pump coronary artery bypass grafting: asystematic review and meta-analysis of propensityscore analyses. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2010;140:
829 –835, 35.e1-13 .
22.D’Agostino RS, Jacobs JP, Badhwar V, et al. The
Society of Thoracic Surgeons Adult Cardiac SurgeryDatabase: 2019 update on outcomes and quality. Ann
Thorac Surg . 2019;107:24 –32.
23.Diegeler A, Borgermann J, Kappert U, et al. Off-
pump versus on-pump coronary-artery bypass grafting
in elderly patients. N Engl J Med . 2013;368:1189 –1198 .
13.1. Insulin Infusion and Other Measures to Reduce
Sternal Wound Infection in Patients Undergoing
CABG
1.Furnary AP, Zerr KJ, Grunkemeier GL, et al. Contin-
uous intravenous insulin infusion reduces the incidenceof deep sternal wound infection in diabetic patients
after cardiac surgical procedures. Ann Thorac Surg .
1999;67:352 –360. discussion 60-2 .
2.Hruska LA, Smith JM, Hendy MP, et al. Continuous
insulin infusion reduces infectious complications indiabetics following coronary surgery. J Card Surg .
2005;20:403 –407.
3.Lazar HL, Chipkin SR, Fitzgerald CA, et al. Tight
glycemic control in diabetic coronary artery bypassgraft patients improves perioperative outcomes and
decreases recurrent ischemic events. Circulation .
2004;109:1497 –1502 .
4.Umpierrez G, Cardona S, Pasquel F, et al. Random-
ized Controlled Trial of Intensive Versus ConservativeGlucose Control in Patients Undergoing Coronary Ar-tery Bypass Graft Surgery: GLUCO-CABG Trial. Dia-
betes Care . 2015;38:1665 –1672 .
5.Furnary AP, Gao G, Grunkemeier GL, et al. Contin-
uous insulin infusion reduces mortality in patients with
diabetes undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting.
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2003;125:1007 –1021 .
6.Furnary AP, Wu Y. Eliminating the diabetic disad-
vantage: the Portland Diabetic Project. Semin Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg . 2006;18:302 –308.
7.Rogers L, Vaja R, Bleetman D, et al. Interventions to
prevent surgical site infection in adults undergoingcardiac surgery. Cochrane Database of Syst Rev .
2019;5:CD013332 .
8.Edwards LD. The epidemiology of 2056 remote site
infections and 1966 surgical wound infections occur-
ring in 1865 patients: a four year study of 40,923
operations at Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke ’s Hospital,
Chicago. Ann Surg . 1976;184:758 –766.
9.Engelman R, Shahian D, Shemin R, et al. The Society
of Thoracic Surgeons practice guideline series: anti-biotic prophylaxis in cardiac surgery, part II: antibioticchoice. Ann Thorac Surg . 2007;83:1569 –1576 .
10.Lazar HL, Salm TV, Engelman R, et al. Prevention
and management of sternal wound infections. J Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg . 2016;152:962 –972.
11.Vander Salm TJ, Okike ON, Pasque MK, et al. Reduc-
tion of sternal infection by application of topical vanco-
mycin. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 1989;98:618 –622.
12.Steingrímsson S, Gustafsson R, Gudbjartsson T,
et al. Sternocutaneous ﬁstulas after cardiac surgery:
incidence and late outcome during a ten-year follow-up.Ann Thorac Surg . 2009;88:1910 –1915.
13.Bhatti F, Dunning J. Does liberal use of bone wax
increase the risk of mediastinitis? Interact Cardiovasc
Thorac Surg . 2003;2:410 –412.14.Kieser TM, Rose MS, Aluthman U, et al. Toward
zero: deep sternal wound infection after 1001consecutive coronary artery bypass procedures usingarterial grafts: implications for diabetic patients.
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2014;148:1887 –1895 .
15.Gandhi GY, Nuttall GA, Abel MD, et al. Intensive
intraoperative insulin therapy versus conventionalglucose management during cardiac surgery: a ran-domized trial. Ann Intern Med . 2007;146:233 –243.
16.D’Agostino RS, Jacobs JP, Badhwar V, et al. The
Society of Thoracic Surgeons Adult Cardiac SurgeryDatabase: 2019 update on outcomes and quality. Ann
Thorac Surg . 2019;107:24 –32.
17.
Gelijns AC, Moskowitz AJ, Acker MA, et al. Man-
agement practices and major infections after cardiacsurgery. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;64:372 –381.
18.Anderson DJ, Podgorny K, Berríos-Torres SI, et al.
Strategies to prevent surgical site infections in acute
care hospitals: 2014 update. Infect Control Hosp Epi-
demiol . 2014;35(suppl 2):S66 –S88.
19.Lazar HL, McDonnell M, Chipkin SR, et al. The
Society of Thoracic Surgeons practice guideline series:
blood glucose management during adult cardiac sur-
gery. Ann Thorac Surg . 2009;87:663 –669.
20.Abelev Z, Seth A, Patel R, et al. Continuous insulin
infusion is associated with a reduced post-surgicallength of stay, but not with the complication rate, in
patients with diabetes mellitus undergoing coronary
artery bypass graft. J Endocrinol Invest . 2011;34:770 –
774.
21.Ogawa S, Okawa Y, Sawada K, et al. Continuous
postoperative insulin infusion reduces deep sternal
wound infection in patients with diabetes undergoingcoronary artery bypass grafting using bilateral internalmammary artery grafts: a propensity-matched anal-ysis. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg . 2016;49:420 –426.
22.Lazar HL, Ketchedjian A, Haime M, et al. Topical
vancomycin in combination with perioperative antibi-otics and tight glycemic control helps to eliminatesternal wound infections. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg .
2014;148:1035 –1038, 8-40 .
23.Koek MBG, Hopmans TEM, Soetens LC, et al.
Adhering to a national surgical care bundle reduces therisk of surgical site infections. PLoS One . 2017;12:
e0184200 .
24.Lavallée JF, Gray TA, Dumville J, et al. The effects
of care bundles on patient outcomes: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Implement Sci . 2017;12:142 .
25.Andrade LS, Siliprandi EMO, Karsburg LL, et al.
Surgical site infection prevention bundle in cardiacsurgery. Arq Bras Cardiol . 2019;112:769 –774.
26.Edwards FH, Engelman RM, Houck P, et al. The
Society of Thoracic Surgeons practice guideline series:antibiotic prophylaxis in cardiac surgery, part I: dura-tion. Ann Thorac Surg . 2006;81:397 –404.
27.Vestergaard RF, Jensen H, Vind-Kezunovic S, et al.
Bone healing after median sternotomy: a comparisonof two hemostatic devices. J Cardiothorac Surg .
2010;5:117 .
28.Schwann TA, Habib RH, Wallace A, et al. Operative
outcomes of multiple-arterial versus single-arterialcoronary bypass grafting. Ann Thorac Surg . 2018;105:
1109 –1119.
29.Sa MP, Ferraz PE, Escobar RR, et al. Skeletonized
versus pedicled internal thoracic artery and risk ofsternal wound infection after coronary bypass surgery:Lawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e116

meta-analysis and meta-regression of 4817 patients.
Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg . 2013;16:849 –857.
30.Butterworth J, Wagenknecht LE, Legault C, et al.
Attempted control of hyperglycemia during cardio-pulmonary bypass fails to improve neurologic or neu-robehavioral outcomes in patients without diabetes
mellitus undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting.
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2005;130:1319 .
31.Cardona S, Pasquel FJ, Fayfman M, et al. Hospi-
talization costs and clinical outcomes in CABG patientstreated with intensive insulin therapy. J Diabetes
Complications . 2017;31:742 –747.
32.Hillis LD, Smith PK, Anderson JL, et al. 2011 ACCF/
AHA guideline for coronary artery bypass graft sur-gery: a report of the American College of CardiologyFoundation/American Heart Association Task Force on
Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2011;58:e123 –
e210 .
13.2. Antiplatelet Therapy in Patients
Undergoing CABG
1.Bybee KA, Powell BD, Valeti U, et al. Preoperative
aspirin therapy is associated with improved post-
operative outcomes in patients undergoing coronary
artery bypass grafting. Circulation . 2005;112(suppl I):
I-286 –I-292 .
2.Dacey LJ, Munoz JJ, Johnson ER, et al. Effect of
preoperative aspirin use on mortality in coronary arterybypass grafting patients. Ann Thorac Surg . 2000;70:
1986 –1990 .
3.Hastings S, Myles P, McIlroy D. Aspirin and coronary
artery surgery: a systematic review and meta-analysis.Br J Anaesth . 2015;115:376 –385.
4.Ma X, Ma C, Yun Y, et al. Safety and ef ﬁcacy out-
comes of preoperative aspirin in patients undergoing
coronary artery bypass grafting: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol Ther .
2014;19:97 –113.
5.Sá MPBO, Soares AF, Miranda RGA, et al. Stop-
ping versus continuing acetylsalicylic acid beforecoronary artery bypass surgery: a systematic reviewand meta-analysis of 14 randomized controlled trialswith 4499 patients. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg .
2017;52:838 –847.
6.Jacob M, Smedira N, Blackstone E, et al. Effect of
timing of chronic preoperative aspirin discontinuationon morbidity and mortality in coronary artery bypasssurgery. Circulation . 2011;123:577 –583.
7.Mikkola R, Wistbacka J-O, Gunn J, et al. Timing of
preoperative aspirin discontinuation and outcome afterelective coronary artery bypass graft surgery.J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth . 2012;26:245 –250.
8.Hansson EC, Jidéus L, Åberg B, et al. Coronary ar-
tery bypass grafting-related bleeding complications in
patients treated with ticagrelor or clopidogrel: a
nationwide study. Eur Heart J . 2016;37:189 –197.
9.Herman CR, Buth KJ, Kent BA, et al. Clopidogrel
increases blood transfusion and hemorrhagic compli-cations in patients undergoing cardiac surgery. Ann
Thorac Surg . 2010;89:397 –402.
10.Firanescu CE, Martens EJ, Schönberger JPAM,
et al. Postoperative blood loss in patients undergoingcoronary artery bypass surgery after preoperativetreatment with clopidogrel: a prospective randomised
controlled study. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg . 2009;36:
856 –862.11.Held C, Asenblad N, Bassand JP, et al. Ticagrelor
versus clopidogrel in patients with acute coronarysyndromes undergoing coronary artery bypass surgery:results from the PLATO (Platelet Inhibition and Patient
Outcomes) trial. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2011;57:672 –684.
12.Bizzarri F, Scolletta S, Tucci E, et al. Perioperative
use of tiro ﬁban hydrochloride (Aggrastat) does not
increase surgical bleeding after emergency or urgent
coronary artery bypass grafting. J Thorac Cardiovasc
Surg. 2001;122:1181 –1185 .
13.Dyke CM, Bhatia D, Lorenz TJ, et al. Immediate
coronary artery bypass surgery after platelet inhibitionwith epti ﬁbatide: results from PURSUIT. Platelet
Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa in Unstable Angina: ReceptorSuppression Using Integrelin Therapy. Ann Thorac
Surg. 2000;70:866 –871. discussion 71-2 .
14.Lincoff AM, LeNarz LA, Despotis GJ, et al. Abcix-
imab and bleeding during coronary surgery: resultsfrom the EPILOG and EPISTENT trials. Improve Long-
term Outcome with abciximab GP IIb/IIIa blockade.
Evaluation of Platelet IIb/IIIa Inhibition in STENTing.Ann Thorac Surg . 2000;70:516 –526.
15.Berger JS, Frye CB, Harshaw Q, et al. Impact of
clopidogrel in patients with acute coronary syndromesrequiring coronary artery bypass surgery: a multicenteranalysis. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2008;52:1693 –1701 .
16.Siller-Matula JM, Petre A, Delle-Karth G, et al.
Impact of preoperative use of P2Y12 receptor in-hibitors on clinical outcomes in cardiac andnon-cardiac surgery: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur Heart J Acute Cardiovasc Care . 2017;6:
753–770.
17.Biancari F, Airaksinen KEJ, Lip GYH. Bene ﬁts and
risks of using clopidogrel before coronary artery
bypass surgery: systematic review and meta-analysis
of randomized trials and observational studies.J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2012;143:665 –675.e4 .
18.Kremke M, Tang M, Bak M, et al. Antiplatelet
therapy at the time of coronary artery bypass grafting:a multicentre cohort study. European J Cardiothorac
Surg
. 2013;44:e133 –e140 .
19.Gherli R, Mariscalco G, Dalén M, et al. Safety of
preoperative use of ticagrelor with or without aspirincompared with aspirin alone in patients with acutecoronary syndromes undergoing coronary arterybypass grafting. JAMA Cardiol . 2016;1:921 –928.
20.Gurbel PA, Bliden KP, Butler K, et al. Randomized
double-blind assessment of the ONSET and OFFSET ofthe antiplatelet effects of ticagrelor versus clopidogrel
in patients with stable coronary artery disease: the
ONSET/OFFSET study. Circulation . 2009;120:2577 –
2585 .
21.Tom /C20si/C20c A, Schotborgh MA, Manshanden JSJ, et al.
Coronary artery bypass grafting-related bleedingcomplications in patients treated with dual antiplatelettreatment. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg . 2016;50:849 –856.
22.Smith PK, Goodnough LT, Levy JH, et al. Mortality
beneﬁt with prasugrel in the TRITON-TIMI 38 coronary
artery bypass grafting cohort: risk-adjusted retro-spective data analysis. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2012;60:388 –
396.
23.Dudek D, Dziewierz A, Widimsky P, et al. Impact of
prasugrel pretreatment and timing of coronary artery
bypass grafting on clinical outcomes of patients with
non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction: fromthe A Comparison of Prasugrel at PCI or Time ofDiagnosis of Non-ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction
(ACCOAST) study. Am Heart J . 2015;170:1025 –1032.e2 .
24.Myles PS, Smith JA, Forbes A, et al. Stopping vs.
continuing aspirin before coronary artery surgery.N Engl J Med . 2016;374:728 –737.
25.Deja MA, Kargul T, Domaradzki W, et al. Effects of
preoperative aspirin in coronary artery bypass grafting:
a double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized trial.J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2012;144:204 –209.
26.STS. ACSD Training Manual. 2019. Accessed March
30, 2021. Available at https://www.sts.org/sites/
default/ ﬁles/ACSD_TrainingManualV2-9_July2019.pdf
27.Eagle KA, Guyton RA, Davidoff R, et al. ACC/AHA
2004 guideline update for coronary artery bypass
graft surgery: a report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force onPractice Guidelines (Committee to Update the 1999Guidelines for Coronary Artery Bypass Graft Surgery). J
Am Coll Cardiol . 2004;44:e213 –e311.
13.3. Beta Blockers and Amiodarone in Patients
Undergoing CABG
1.Auer J, Weber T, Berent R, et al. A comparison be-
tween oral antiarrhythmic drugs in the prevention ofatrial ﬁbrillation after cardiac surgery: the pilot study
of prevention of postoperative atrial ﬁbrillation
(SPPAF), a randomized, placebo-controlled trial.
Am
Heart J . 2004;147:636 –643.
2.Imren Y, Benson AA, Zor H, et al. Preoperative beta-
blocker use reduces atrial ﬁbrillation in off-pump
coronary bypass surgery. ANZ J Surg . 2007;77:429 –
432.
3.Pﬁsterer ME, Klöter-Weber UC, Huber M, et al.
Prevention of supraventricular tachyarrhythmias afteropen heart operation by low-dose sotalol: a prospec-
tive, double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled
study. Ann Thorac Surg . 1997;64:1113 –1119.
4.Gomes JA, Ip J, Santoni-Rugiu F, et al. Oral d,l
sotalol reduces the incidence of postoperative atrial
ﬁbrillation in coronary artery bypass surgery patients:
a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study.J Am Coll Cardiol . 1999;34:334 –339.
5.Yazicioglu L, Eryilmaz S, Sirlak M, et al. The effect of
preoperative digitalis and atenolol combination on
postoperative atrial ﬁbrillation incidence. Eur J Car-
diothorac Surg . 2002;22:397 –401.
6.Blessberger H, Kammler J, Domanovits H, et al.
Perioperative beta-blockers for preventing surgery-
related mortality and morbidity. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev . 2014:Cd004476 .
7.Thein PM, White K, Banker K, et al. Preoperative se
of oral beta-adrenergic blocking agents and the inci-
dence of new-onset atrial ﬁbrillation after cardiac
surgery. A systematic review and meta-analysis. Heart
Lung Circ . 2018;27:310 –321.
8.Crystal E, Connolly SJ, Sleik K, et al. Interventions
on prevention of postoperative atrial ﬁbrillation in
patients undergoing heart surgery: a meta-analysis.Circulation . 2002;106:75 –80.
9.Arsenault KA, Yusuf AM, Crystal E, et al. In-
terventions for preventing post-operative atrial ﬁbril-
lation in patients undergoing heart surgery. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev . 2013;1:CD003611 .
10.Chatterjee S, Sardar P, Mukherjee D, et al. Timing
and route of amiodarone for prevention of post-operative atrial ﬁbrillation after cardiac surgery: aJACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee117

network regression meta-analysis. Pacing Clin Elec-
trophysiol . 2013;36:1017 –1023 .
11.Mitchell LB, Exner DV, Wyse DG, et al. Prophylactic
Oral Amiodarone for the Prevention of Arrhythmiasthat Begin Early After Revascularization, ValveReplacement, or Repair: PAPABEAR: a randomizedcontrolled trial. JAMA . 2005;294:3093 –3100 .
12.Brinkman WT, Herbert MA, Prince SL, et al. Pre-
operative beta-blocker usage: is it really worthy ofbeing a quality indicator? Ann Thorac Surg . 2011;92:
788 –795. discussion 95-6 .
13.Kohsaka S, Miyata H, Motomura N, et al. Effects of
preoperative
b-blocker use on clinical outcomes after
coronary artery bypass grafting: a report from theJapanese Cardiovascular Surgery Database. Anesthesi-
ology . 2016;124:45 –55.
14.O’Neal JB, FTt Billings, Liu X, et al. Effect of pre-
operative beta-blocker use on outcomes followingcardiac surgery. Am J Cardiol . 2017;120:1293 –1297 .
15.Lin T, Hasaniya NW, Krider S, et al. Mortality
reduction with beta-blockers in ischemic cardiomyop-
athy patients undergoing coronary artery bypassgrafting. Congest Heart Fail . 2010;16:170 –174.
16.Ferguson TB Jr, Coombs LP, Peterson ED. Preop-
erative beta-blocker use and mortality and morbidity
following CABG surgery in North America. JAMA .
2002;287:2221 –2227 .
17.Kertai MD, Esper SA, Akushevich I, et al. Preopera-
tive CYP2D6 metabolism-dependent
b-blocker use and
mortality after coronary artery bypass grafting surgery.J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2014;147:1368 –1375.e3 .
18.Blessberger H, Lewis SR, Pritchard MW, et al.
Perioperative beta-blockers for preventing surgery-
related mortality and morbidity in adults undergoing
cardiac surgery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2019;9:
Cd013435 .
19.Aasbo JD, Lawrence AT, Krishnan K, et al. Amio-
darone prophylaxis reduces major cardiovascular
morbidity and length of stay after cardiac surgery: ameta-analysis. Ann Intern Med . 2005;143:327 –336.
14.1. Pharmacotherapy for Risk Factor Control
in Patients After Revascularization
1.Grundy SM, Stone NJ, Bailey AL, et al. 2018 AHA/
ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/ABC/A CPM/ADA/AGS/APhA/
ASPC/NLA/PCNA Guideline on the management ofblood cholesterol: a report of the American College ofCardiology/American Heart Association Task Force onClinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;73:
e285 –e350 .
2.Arnett DK, Blumenthal RS, Albert MA, et al. 2019
ACC/AHA guideline on the primary prevention of car-diovascular disease: a report of the American Collegeof Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Forceon Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2019;74:e177 –e232 .
3.Whelton PK, Carey RM, Aronow WS, et al. 2017 ACC/
AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/ASPC/NMA/PCNA guideline for the prevention, detection, evalua-
tion, and management of high blood pressure in
adults: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on ClinicalPractice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2018;71:e127 –
e248 .
4.American Diabetes Association. 8. Pharmacologic
approaches to glycemic treatment: standards ofmedical care in diabetes-2018. Diabetes Care . 2018;41:
S73–S85.
14.2. Dual Antiplatelet Therapy in Patients After
PCI
1.Mehran R, Baber U, Sharma SK, et al. Ticagrelor with
or without aspirin in high-risk patients after PCI. N Engl
J Med . 2019;381:2032 –2042 .
2.Hahn JY, Song YB, Oh JH, et al. Effect of P2Y12
inhibitor monotherapy vs dual antiplatelet therapy on
cardiovascular events in patients undergoing percuta-neous coronary intervention: the SMART-CHOICErandomized clinical trial. JAMA . 2019;321:2428 –2437 .
3.Watanabe H, Domei T, Morimoto T, et al. Effect of 1-
month dual antiplatelet therapy followed by clopi-dogrel vs 12-month dual antiplatelet therapy on car-diovascular and bleeding events in patients receiving
PCI: the STOPDAPT-2 randomized clinical trial. JAMA .
2019;321:2414 –2427 .
4.Kim BK, Hong SJ, Cho YH, et al. Effect of ticagrelor
monotherapy vs ticagrelor with aspirin on majorbleeding and cardiovascular events in patients withacute coronary syndrome: the TICO randomized clinicaltrial. JAMA . 2020;323:2407
–2416 .
5.Bittl JA, Baber U, Bradley SM, et al. Duration of dual
antiplatelet therapy: a systematic review for the 2016ACC/AHA guideline focused update on duration of dual
antiplatelet therapy in patients with coronary artery
disease: a report of the American College of Cardiol-ogy/American Heart Association Task Force on ClinicalPractice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2016;68:1116 –
1139.
6.Levine GN, Bates ER, Bittl JA, et al. 2016 ACC/AHA
guideline focused update on duration of dual anti-platelet therapy in patients with coronary artery dis-
ease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association Task Force on ClinicalPractice Guidelines: an update of the 2011 ACCF/AHA/SCAI guideline for percutaneous coronary intervention,2011 ACCF/AHA guideline for coronary artery bypassgraft surgery, 2012 ACC/AHA/ACP/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS guideline for the diagnosis and management of
patients with stable ischemic heart disease, 2013
ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of ST-elevation myocardial infarction, 2014 AHA/ACCguideline for the management of patients with non-ST-elevation acute coronary syndromes, and 2014ACC/AHA guideline on perioperative cardiovascular
evaluation and management of patients undergoing
noncardiac surgery. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2016;68:1082 –
1115.
7.Vranckx P, Valgimigli M, Juni P, et al. Ticagrelor plus
aspirin for 1 month, followed by ticagrelor mono-therapy for 23 months vs aspirin plus clopidogrel orticagrelor for 12 months, followed by aspirin mono-therapy for 12 months after implantation of a drug-
eluting stent: a multicentre, open-label, randomised
superiority trial. Lancet . 2018;392:940 –949.
14.3. Antiplatelet Therapy in Patients After CABG
1.Mangano DT, Multicenter Study of Perioperative
Ischemia Research Group. Aspirin and mortality fromcoronary bypass surgery. N Engl J Med . 2002;347:
1309 –1317.
2.Lorenz RL, Schacky CV, Weber M, et al. Improved
aortocoronary bypass patency by low-dose aspirin
(100 mg daily). Effects on platelet aggregation and
thromboxane formation. Lancet . 1984;1:1261 –1264 .3.Antithrombotic Trialists ’Collaboration. Collabora-
tive meta-analysis of randomised trials of antiplatelettherapy for prevention of death, myocardial infarction,and stroke in high risk patients. BMJ. 2002;324:71 –86.
4.Chakos A, Jbara D, Singh K, et al. Network meta-
analysis of antiplatelet therapy following coronaryartery bypass grafting (CABG): none versus one versustwo antiplatelet agents. Ann Cardiothorac Surg .
2018;7:577 –585.
5.Goldman S, Copeland J, Moritz T, et al. Saphenous
vein graft patency 1 year after coronary artery bypasssurgery and effects of antiplatelet therapy. Results ofa Veterans Administration Cooperative Study. Circula-
tion. 1989;80:1190 –1197.
6.Brown BG, Cukingnan RA, DeRouen T, et al.
Improved graft patency in patients treated withplatelet-inhibiting therapy after coronary bypass sur-gery. Circulation . 1985;72:138 –146.
7.Meister W, von Schacky C, Weber M, et al. Low-dose
acetylsalicylic acid (100 mg/day) after aortocoronarybypass surgery: a placebo-controlled trial. Br J Clin
Pharmacol . 1984;17:703 –711
.
8.Cardoso R, Knijnik L, Whelton SP, et al. Dual versus
single antiplatelet therapy after coronary arterybypass graft surgery: an updated meta-analysis. Int J
Cardiol . 2018;269:80 –88.
9.Solo K, Lavi S, Kabali C, et al. Antithrombotic
treatment after coronary artery bypass graft surgery:systematic review and network meta-analysis. BMJ.
2019;367:l5476 .
10.Zhao Q, Zhu Y, Xu Z, et al. Effect of ticagrelor plus
aspirin, ticagrelor alone, or aspirin alone on saphenousvein graft patency 1 year after coronary artery bypassgrafting: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA . 2018;319:
1677 –1686 .
11.Levine GN, Bates ER, Bittl JA, et al. 2016 ACC/AHA
guideline focused update on duration of dual anti-platelet therapy in patients with coronary artery dis-ease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical
Practice Guidelines: an update of the 2011 ACCF/AHA/
SCAI guideline for percutaneous coronary intervention,2011 ACCF/AHA guideline for coronary artery bypassgraft surgery, 2012 ACC/AHA/ACP/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS guideline for the diagnosis and management ofpatients with stable ischemic heart disease, 2013
ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of ST-
elevation myocardial infarction, 2014 AHA/ACCguideline for the management of patients with non-ST-elevation acute coronary syndromes, and 2014ACC/AHA guideline on perioperative cardiovascularevaluation and management of patients undergoingnoncardiac surgery. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2016;68:1082 –
1115.
12.Sethi GK, Copeland JG, Goldman S, et al. Implica-
tions of preoperative administration of aspirin in pa-tients undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting.
Department of Veterans Affairs Cooperative Study on
Antiplatelet Therapy. J Am Coll Cardiol . 1990;15:15 –
20.
14.4. Beta Blockers in Patients After
Revascularization
1.Motivala AA, Parikh V, Roe M, et al. Predictors,
trends, and outcomes (among older patients $65
years of age) associated with beta-blocker use in pa-tients with stable angina undergoing electiveLawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e118

percutaneous coronary intervention: insights from the
NCDR Registry. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv . 2016;9:1639 –
1648 .
2.Bangalore S, Steg G, Deedwania P, et al. b-Blocker
use and clinical outcomes in stable outpatients withand without coronary artery disease. JAMA . 2012;308:
1340 –1349 .
3.Bangalore S, Makani H, Radford M, et al. Clinical
outcomes with
b-blockers for myocardial infarction: a
meta-analysis of randomized trials. Am J Med .
2014;127:939 –953.
4.Andersson C, Shilane D, Go AS, et al. b-blocker
therapy and cardiac events among patients with newlydiagnosed coronary heart disease. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2014;64:247 –252.
5.Angeloni E, Melina G, Roscitano A, et al.
b-Blockers
improve survival of patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease after coronary artery bypass
grafting. Ann Thorac Surg . 2013;95:525 –531.
6.Zhang H, Yuan X, Zhang H, et al. Ef ﬁcacy of long-
term b-blocker therapy for secondary prevention of
long-term outcomes after coronary artery bypassgrafting surgery. Circulation . 2015;131:2194 –2201 .
7.Amsterdam EA, Wenger NK, Brindis RG, et al. 2014
AHA/ACC guideline for the management of patientswith non-ST-elevation acute coronary syndromes: areport of the American College of Cardiology/Amer-
ican Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guide-
lines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;64:e139 –e228 .
8.O’Gara PT, Kushner FG, Ascheim DD, et al. 2013
ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of ST-elevation myocardial infarction: a report of theAmerican College of Cardiology Foundation/AmericanHeart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2013;61:e78 –e140 .
9.Bangalore S, Makani H, Radford M, et al. Clinical
outcomes with beta-blockers for myocardial infarction:
a meta-analysis of randomized trials. Am J Med .
2014;127:939 –953.
14.5. Beta Blockers for the Prevention of Atrial
Fibrillation After CABG
1.Arsenault KA, Yusuf AM, Crystal E, et al. In-
terventions for preventing post-operative atrial ﬁbril-
lation in patients undergoing heart surgery. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev . 2013;1:CD003611 .
2.Crystal E, Gar ﬁnkle MS, Connolly SS, et al. In-
terventions for preventing post-operative atrial ﬁbril-
lation in patients undergoing heart surgery. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev . 2004:Cd003611 .
3.Burgess DC, Kilborn MJ, Keech AC. Interventions for
prevention of post-operative atrial ﬁbrillation and its
complications after cardiac surgery: a meta-analysis.Eur Heart J . 2006;27:2846 –2857 .
4.Khan MF, Wendel CS, Movahed MR. Prevention of
post-coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) atrial
ﬁbrillation: ef ﬁcacy of prophylactic beta-blockers in
the modern era: a meta-analysis of latest randomizedcontrolled trials. Ann Noninvasive Electrocardiol .
2013;18:58 –68.
5.Hillis LD, Smith PK, Anderson JL, et al. 2011 ACCF/
AHA guideline for coronary artery bypass graft sur-gery: a report of the American College of CardiologyFoundation/American Heart Association Task Force on
Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2011;58:e123 –
e210 .6.Fuster V, Ryden LE, Cannom DS, et al. ACC/AHA/
ESC 2006 guidelines for the management of patientswith atrial ﬁbrillation: a report of the American College
of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force
on Practice Guidelines and the European Society of
Cardiology Committee for Practice Guidelines (Writing
Committee to Revise the 2001 Guidelines for theManagement of Patients With Atrial Fibrillation). JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2006;48:e149 –e246 .
7.Fuster V, Rydén LE, Cannom DS, et al. 2011 ACCF/
AHA/HRS focused updates incorporated into the ACC/
AHA/ESC 2006 guidelines for the management of
patients with atrial ﬁbrillation: a report of the Amer-
ican College of Cardiology Foundation/American HeartAssociation Task Force on practice guidelines. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2011;57:e101 –e198 .
8.Kaw R, Hernandez AV, Masood I, et al. Short- and
long-term mortality associated with new-onset atrial
ﬁbrillation after coronary artery bypass grafting: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. J Thorac Car-
diovasc Surg . 2011;141:1305 –1312.
9.Kosmidou I, Chen S, Kappetein AP, et al. New-onset
atrial ﬁbrillation after PCI or CABG for left main dis-
ease: the EXCEL trial. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2018;71:739 –
748.
10.Blessberger H, Lewis SR, Pritchard MW, et al.
Perioperative beta-blockers for preventing surgery-
related mortality and morbidity in adults undergoingnon-cardiac surgery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev .
2019;9:Cd013438 .
14.6. Antiplatelet Therapy in Patients With
Atrial Fibrillation on Anticoagulation After PCI
1.Lopes RD, Heizer G, Aronson R, et al. Antithrombotic
therapy after acute coronary syndrome or PCI in atrial
ﬁbrillation. N Engl J Med . 2019;380:1509 –1524 .
2.Lopes RD, Hong H, Harskamp RE, et al. Safety and
efﬁcacy of antithrombotic strategies in patients with
atrial ﬁbrillation undergoing percutaneous coronary
intervention: a network meta-analysis of randomizedcontrolled trials. JAMA Cardiol . 2019;4:747 –755.
3.Lopes RD, Leonardi S, Wojdyla DM, et al. Stent
Thrombosis in Patients With Atrial Fibrillation Under-
going Coronary Stenting in the AUGUSTUS Trial. Cir-
culation . 2020;141:781 –783.
4.Vranckx P, Valgimigli M, Eckardt L, et al. Edoxaban-
based versus vitamin K antagonist-based antith-rombotic regimen after successful coronary stenting inpatients with atrial ﬁbrillation (ENTRUST-AF PCI): a
randomised, open-label, phase 3b trial. Lancet .
2019;394:1335 –1343 .
5.
Dewilde WJ, Oirbans T, Verheugt FW, et al. Use of
clopidogrel with or without aspirin in patientstaking oral anticoagulant therapy and undergoingpercutaneous coronary intervention: an open-label,randomised, controlled trial. Lancet . 2013;381:1107 –
1115.
6.Cannon CP, Bhatt DL, Oldgren J, et al. Dual
antithrombotic therapy with dabigatran after PCI inatrial ﬁbrillation. N Engl J Med . 2017;377:1513 –1524 .
7.Gibson CM, Mehran R, Bode C, et al. Prevention of
bleeding in patients with atrial ﬁbrillation undergoing
PCI. N Engl J Med . 2016;375:2423 –2434 .
8.January CT, Wann LS, Calkins H, et al. 2019 AHA/
ACC/HRS focused update of the 2014 AHA/ACC/HRS
guideline for the management of patients with atrialﬁbrillation: a report of the American College ofCardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on
Clinical Practice Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm So-ciety. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;74:104 –132.
15.1. Cardiac Rehabilitation and Education
1.Anderson L, Sharp GA, Norton RJ, et al. Home-based
versus centre-based cardiac rehabilitation. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev . 2017;6:Cd007130 .
2.Anderson L, Oldridge N, Thompson DR, et al. Exer-
cise-based cardiac rehabilitation for coronary heartdisease: Cochrane systematic review and meta-anal-ysis. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2016;67:1 –12.
3.Janssen V, De Gucht V, Dusseldorp E, et al. Lifestyle
modiﬁcation programmes for patients with coronary
heart disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis
of randomized controlled trials. Eur J Prev Cardiol .
2013;20:620 –640.
4.Anderson L, Brown JP, Clark AM, et al. Patient
education in the management of coronary heartdisease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev .2 0 1 7 ; 6 :
CD008895 .
5.Eckel RH, Jakicic JM, Ard JD, et al. 2013 AHA/ACC
guideline on lifestyle management to reduce cardio-vascular risk: a report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on
Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;63:2960 –
2984 .
6.Riegel B, Moser DK, Buck HG, et al. Self-care for the
prevention and management of cardiovascular diseaseand stroke: a scienti ﬁc statement for healthcare pro-
fessionals from the American Heart Association. JA m
Heart Assoc . 2017;6:e006997 .
7.Smith SC Jr, Benjamin EJ, Bonow RO, et al. AHA/
ACCF secondary prevention and risk reduction therapy
for patients with coronary and other atherosclerotic
vascular disease: 2011 update: a guideline from the
American Heart Association and American College ofCardiology Foundation. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2011;58:
2432 –2446 .
8.Dalal HM, Doherty P, Taylor RS. Cardiac rehabilita-
tion. BMJ. 2015;351:h5000 .
9.Thomas RJ, Balady G, Banka G, et al. 2018 ACC/AHA
clinical performance and quality measures for cardiacrehabilitation: a report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on
Performance Measures. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2018;71:
1814 –1837 .
10.Balady GJ, Williams MA, Ades PA, et al. Core
components of cardiac rehabilitation/secondary pre-vention programs: 2007 update: a scienti ﬁc statement
from the American Heart Association Exercise, CardiacRehabilitation, and Prevention Committee, the Council
on Clinical Cardiology; the Councils on Cardiovascular
Nursing, Epidemiology and Prevention, and Nutrition,Physical Activity, and Metabolism; and the AmericanAssociation of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabil-itation. Circulation . 2007;115:2675 –2682 .
11.Dunlay SM, Pack QR, Thomas RJ, et al. Participation
in cardiac rehabilitation, readmissions, and death afteracute myocardial infarction. Am J Med . 2014;127:538 –
546.
12.Hamm LF, Sanderson BK, Ades PA, et al. Core
competencies for cardiac rehabilitation/secondaryprevention professionals: 2010 update: positionstatement of the American Association of Cardiovas-cular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation. J Cardiopulm
Rehabil Prev . 2011;31:2 –10.JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee119

13.American Association of Cardiovascular and Pul-
monary Rehabilitation. Guidelines for Cardiac Rehabil-
itation and Secondary Prevention Programs . 5th ed.
Human Kinetics; 2013:323 .
14.Thomas RJ, Beatty AL, Beckie TM, et al. Home-
based cardiac rehabilitation: a scienti ﬁc statement
from the American Association of Cardiovascular and
Pulmonary Rehabilitation, the American Heart Associ-ation, and the American College of Cardiology. Circu-
lation . 2019;140:e69 –e89.
15.Buckingham SA, Taylor RS, Jolly K, et al. Home-
based versus centre-based cardiac rehabilitation:abridged Cochrane systematic review and meta-anal-ysis. Open Heart . 2016;3:e000463 .
16.Dalal HM, Zawada A, Jolly K, et al. Home based
versus centre based cardiac rehabilitation: Cochrane
systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ. 2010;340:
b5631 .
17.Taylor RS, Dalal H, Jolly K, et al. Home-based
versus centre-based cardiac rehabilitation. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev . 2015;8:CD007130 .
18.Arnett DK, Blumenthal RS, Albert MA, et al. 2019
ACC/AHA guideline on the primary prevention of car-diovascular disease: a report of the American Collegeof Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force
on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2019;74:e177 –e232 .
19.Lloyd-Jones DM, Hong Y, Labarthe D, et al.
Deﬁning and setting national goals for cardiovascular
health promotion and disease reduction: the AmericanHeart Association ’s strategic impact goal through
2020 and beyond. Circulation . 2010;121:586 –613.
1 5 . 2 .S m o k i n gC e s s a t i o ni nP a t i e n t sA f t e r
Revascularization
1.Cahill K, Lindson-Hawley N, Thomas KH, et al.
Nicotine receptor partial agonists for smoking cessa-tion. Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2016;2016:
Cd006103 .
2.Stead LF, Koilpillai P, Fanshawe TR, et al. Combined
pharmacotherapy and behavioural interventions forsmoking cessation. Cochrane Database Syst Rev .
2016;3:Cd008286 .
3.Ebbert JO, Elrashidi MY, Stead LF. Interventions for
smokeless tobacco use cessation. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev . 2015;2015:Cd004306 .
4.Rigotti NA, Clair C, Munafò MR, et al. Interventions
for smoking cessation in hospitalised patients.Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2012;5:Cd001837 .
5.Suissa K, Larivière J, Eisenberg MJ, et al.
Efﬁcacy and safety of smoking cessation interventions
in patients with cardiovascular disease: a networkmeta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Circ
Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes . 2017;10:e002458 .
6.U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
Smoking Cessation. A Report of the Surgeon General.2020. Accessed March 23, 2020. Available at: https://
www.hhs.gov/sites/default/ ﬁles/2020-cessation-sgr-
full-report.pdf
7.Barua RS, Rigotti NA, Benowitz NL, et al. 2018
ACC expert consensus decision pathway on tobacco
cessation treatment: a report of the American Collegeof Cardiology Task Force on Clinical Expert ConsensusDocuments. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2018;72:3332 –3365 .8.Zhang YJ, Iqbal J, van Klaveren D, et al. Smoking is
associated with adverse clinical outcomes in patientsundergoing revascularization with PCI or CABG: theSYNTAX trial at 5-year follow-up. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2015;65:1107 –1115.
9.D’Ascenzo F, Bollati M, Clementi F, et al. Incidence
and predictors of coronary stent thrombosis: evidence
from an international collaborative meta-analysis
including 30 studies, 221,066 patients, and 4276thromboses. Int J Cardiol . 2013;167:575 –584.
10.Bhatnagar A, Whitsel LP, Ribisl KM, et al. Elec-
tronic cigarettes: a policy statement from the Amer-
ican Heart Association. Circulation . 2014;130:1418 –
1436 .
11.Bhatnagar A, Whitsel LP, Blaha MJ, et al. New and
emerging tobacco products and the nicotine endgame:the role of robust regulation and comprehensive to-bacco control and prevention: a presidential advisoryfrom the American Heart Association. Circulation .
2019;139:e937 –e958 .
12.Conklin DJ, Schick S, Blaha MJ, et al. Cardiovascular
injury induced by tobacco products: assessment of riskfactors and biomarkers of harm. A Tobacco Centers of
Regulatory Science compilation. Am J Physiol Heart
Circ Physiol . 2019;316:H801 –H827 .
13.Bhatnagar A. Cardiovascular perspective of the
promises and perils of e-cigarettes. Circ Res . 2016;118:
1872 –1875 .
14.Mirbolouk M, Charkhchi P, Kianoush S, et al.
Prevalence and distribution of e-cigarette use among
U.S. adults: behavioral risk factor surveillance system,
2016. Ann Intern Med . 2018;169:429 –438.
15.Bao W, Xu G, Lu J, et al. Changes in electronic
cigarette use among adults in the United States, 2014-
2016. JAMA . 2018;319:2039 –2041 .
16.Arnett DK, Blumenthal RS, Albert MA, et al. 2019
ACC/AHA guideline on the primary prevention of car-
diovascular disease: a report of the American College
of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Forceon Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2019;74:e177 –e232 .
17.Clinical Practice Guideline Treating Tobacco Use
and Dependence 2008 Update Panel Liaisons, andStaff. A clinical practice guideline for treating tobaccouse and dependence: 2008 update. A U.S. PublicHealth Service report. Am J Prev Med . 2008;35:158 –
176.
18.Anthenelli RM, Benowitz NL, West R, et al.
Neuropsychiatric safety and ef ﬁcacy of varenicline,
bupropion, and nicotine patch in smokers with and
without psychiatric disorders (EAGLES): a double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled clinical trial.Lancet . 2016;387:2507 –2520 .
19.Rigotti NA, Pipe AL, Benowitz NL, et al. Ef ﬁcacy
and safety of varenicline for smoking cessation in pa-tients with cardiovascular disease: a randomized trial.Circulation . 2010;121:221 –229.
20.Windle SB, Bata I, Madan M, et al. A randomized
controlled trial of the ef ﬁcacy and safety of varenicline
for smoking cessation after acute coronary syndrome:design and methods of the Evaluation of Varenicline inSmoking Cessation for Patients Post-Acute Coronary
Syndrome trial. Am Heart J . 2015;170:635 –640.e1 .
21.Windle SB, Dehghani P, Roy N, et al. Smoking
abstinence 1 year after acute coronary syndrome:follow-up from a randomized controlled trial of vare-
nicline in patients admitted to hospital. CMAJ .
2018;190:E347 –E354 .
22.Eisenberg MJ, Windle SB, Roy N, et al. Varenicline
for smoking cessation in hospitalized patients withacute coronary syndrome. Circulation . 2016;133:21 –30.
23.Benowitz NL, Pipe A, West R, et al. Cardiovascular
safety of varenicline, bupropion, and nicotine patch in
smokers: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Intern Med .
2018;178:622 –631.
15.3. Psychological Interventions in Patients
After Revascularization
1.Richards SH, Anderson L, Jenkinson CE, et al. Psy-
chological interventions for coronary heart disease:Cochrane systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur J
Prev Cardiol . 2018;25:247 –259.
2.Kim JM, Stewart R, Lee YS, et al. Effect of escita-
lopram vs placebo treatment for depression on long-term cardiac outcomes in patients with acute coro-nary syndrome: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA .
2018;320:350 –358.
3.Blumenthal JA, Sherwood A, Smith PJ, et al.
Enhancing cardiac rehabilitation with stress manage-ment training: a randomized, clinical ef ﬁcacy trial.
Circulation . 2016;133:1341 –1350 .
4.Rakowska JM. Brief strategic therapy in ﬁrst
myocardial infarction patients with increased levels ofstress: a randomized clinical trial. Anxiety Stress
Coping . 2015;28:687 –705.
5.Berkman LF, Blumenthal J, Burg M, et al. Effects of
treating depression and low perceived social supporton clinical events after myocardial infarction: theEnhancing Recovery in Coronary Heart Disease Pa-tients (ENRICHD) Randomized Trial. JAMA . 2003;289:
3106 –3116.
6.Waterman LA, Belnap BH, Gebara MA, et al.
Bypassing the blues: insomnia in the depressed post-CABG population. Ann Clin Psychiatry . 2020;32:17 –26.
7.Rollman BL, Belnap BH, LeMenager MS, et al.
Telephone-delivered collaborative care for treatingpost-CABG depression: a randomized controlled trial.JAMA . 2009;302:2095 –2103 .
8.Siu AL, Bibbins-Domingo K, Grossman DC, et al.
Screening for depression in adults: US PreventiveServices Task Force Recommendation Statement.JAMA . 2016;315:380 –387.
9.Kronish IM, Moise N, Cheung YK, et al. Effect of
depression screening after acute coronary syn-
dromes on quality of life: the CODIACS-QoL ran-domized clinical trial. JAMA Intern Med . 2019;180:
45–53.
10.Tully PJ, Cosh SM, Baumeister H. The anxious heart
in whose mind? A systematic review and meta-
regression of factors associated with anxiety disorderdiagnosis, treatment and morbidity risk in coronaryheart disease. J Psychosom Res . 2014;77:439 –448.
11.Dickens C. Depression in people with coronary
heart disease: prognostic signi ﬁcance and mechanisms.
Curr Cardiol Rep . 2015;17:83 .
12.Davidson KW, Alcántara C, Miller GE. Selected
psychological comorbidities in coronary heart disease:Lawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e120

challenges and grand opportunities. Am Psychol .
2018;73:1019 –1030 .
13.Thombs BD, Bass EB, Ford DE, et al. Prevalence of
depression in survivors of acute myocardial infarction.
J Gen Intern Med . 2006;21:30 –38.
14.Stenman M, Holzmann MJ, Sartipy U. Association
between preoperative depression and long-term sur-vival following coronary artery bypass surgery - a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Cardiol .
2016;222:462 –466.
15.Okunrintemi V, Valero-Elizondo J, Michos ED, et al.
Association of depression risk with patient experience,healthcare expenditure, and health resource utilization
among adults with atherosclerotic cardiovascular dis-
ease. J Gen Intern Med . 2019;34:2427 –2434 .
16.Bangalore S, Shah R, Pappadopulos E, et al. Car-
diovascular hazards of insuf ﬁcient treatment of
depression among patients with known cardiovasculardisease: a propensity score adjusted analysis. Eur Heart
J Qual Care Clin Outcomes . 2018;4:258 –266.
17.Cohen BE, Edmondson D, Kronish IM. State of the
art review: depression, stress, anxiety, and cardiovas-cular disease. Am J Hypertens . 2015;28:1295 –1302 .
18.Leifheit-Limson EC, Kasl SV, Lin H, et al. Adherence
to risk factor management instructions after acutemyocardial infarction: the role of emotional supportand depressive symptoms. Ann Behav Med . 2012;43:
198–207.
19.Lichtman JH, Froelicher ES, Blumenthal JA, et al.
Depression as a risk factor for poor prognosis amongpatients with acute coronary syndrome: systematicreview and recommendations: a scienti ﬁc statement
from the American Heart Association. Circulation .
2014;129:1350 –1369 .
20.Gale CR, Batty GD, Osborn DP, et al. Mental dis-
orders across the adult life course and future coronaryheart disease: evidence for general susceptibility. Cir-
culation . 2014;129:186 –193.
21.Steptoe A, Kivimäki M. Stress and cardiovascular
disease: an update on current knowledge. Annu Rev
Public Health . 2013;34:337 –354.
22.Carney RM, Freedland KE, Steinmeyer B, et al.
Depression and ﬁve year survival following acute
myocardial infarction: a prospective study. J Affect
Disord . 2008;109:133 –138.
23.Geulayov G, Novikov I, Dankner D, et al. Symptoms
of depression and anxiety and 11-year all-cause mor-tality in men and women undergoing coronary arterybypass graft (CABG) surgery. J Psychosom Res .
2018;105:106 –114.
24.Pedersen SS, von Känel R, Tully PJ, et al. Psy-
chosocial perspectives in cardiovascular disease. Eur J
Prev Cardiol . 2017;24:108 –115.
25.Tully PJ, Baker RA, Turnbull D, et al. The role of
depression and anxiety symptoms in hospital read-missions after cardiac surgery. J Behav Med . 2008;31:
281–290.
26.Blumenthal JA, Lett HS, Babyak MA, et al.
Depression as a risk factor for mortality after coronary
artery bypass surgery. Lancet . 2003;362:604 –609.
27.Tully PJ, Wine ﬁeld HR, Baker RA, et al. Con ﬁrma-
tory factor analysis of the Beck Depression Inventory-IIand the association with cardiac morbidity andmortality after coronary revascularization. J Health
Psychol . 2011;16:584 –595.
28.Poole L, Leigh E, Kidd T, et al. The combined as-
sociation of depression and socioeconomic status withlength of post-operative hospital stay following cor-onary artery bypass graft surgery: data from a pro-
spective cohort study. J Psychosom Res . 2014;76:34 –
40.
29.Connerney I, Sloan RP, Shapiro PA, et al. Depres-
sion is associated with increased mortality 10 yearsafter coronary artery bypass surgery. Psychosom Med .
2010;72:874 –881.
30.Ravven S, Bader C, Azar A, et al. Depressive
symptoms after CABG surgery: a meta-analysis. Harv
Rev Psychiatry . 2013;21:59 –69.
31.Rutledge T, Redwine LS, Linke SE, et al. A meta-
analysis of mental health treatments and cardiac
rehabilitation for improving clinical outcomes and
depression among patients with coronary heart dis-ease. Psychosom Med . 2013;75:335 –349.
32.Kim JM, Bae KY, Stewart R, et al. Escitalopram
treatment for depressive disorder following acutecoronary syndrome: a 24-week double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. J Clin Psychiatry . 2015;76:62 –68.
33.
Taylor CB, Youngblood ME, Catellier D, et al. Ef-
fects of antidepressant medication on morbidity andmortality in depressed patients after myocardial
infarction. Arch Gen Psychiatry . 2005;62:792 –798.
34.Rollman BL, Belnap BH, LeMenager MS, et al. The
Bypassing the Blues treatment protocol: steppedcollaborative care for treating post-CABG depression.Psychosom Med . 2009;71:217 –230.
35.Nieuwsma JA, Williams JW Jr, Namdari N, et al.
Diagnostic accuracy of screening tests and treatmentfor post-acute coronary syndrome depression: a sys-tematic review. Ann Intern Med . 2017;167:725 –735.
36.Lichtman JH, Bigger JT Jr, Blumenthal JA, et al.
Depression and coronary heart disease: recommenda-
tions for screening, referral, and treatment: a science
advisory from the American Heart Association Pre-vention Committee of the Council on CardiovascularNursing, Council on Clinical Cardiology, Council onEpidemiology and Prevention, and InterdisciplinaryCouncil on Quality of Care and Outcomes Research.Circulation . 2008;118:1768 –1775.
37.SmithSC Jr,Benjamin EJ, BonowRO, et al. AHA/ACCF
secondary prevention and risk reduction therapy for
patients with coronary and other atheroscleroticvascular disease: 2011 update: a guideline from theAmerican Heart Association and American College ofCardiology Foundation. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2011;58:2432 –
2446 .
16.1. Assessment of Outcomes in Patients After
Revascularization
1.Hannan EL, Wu C, Ryan TJ, et al. Do hospitals and
surgeons with higher coronary artery bypass graft
surgery volumes still have lower risk-adjusted mor-tality rates? Circulation . 2003;108:795 –801.
2.Kim LK, Looser P, Swaminathan RV, et al. Outcomes
in patients undergoing coronary artery bypass graftsurgery in the United States based on hospital volume,2007 to 2011. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2016;151:
1686 –1692 .3.Nallamothu BK, Saint S, Ramsey SD, et al. The role
of hospital volume in coronary artery bypass grafting:is more always better? J Am Coll Cardiol . 2001;38:
1923 –1930 .
4.Peterson ED, Coombs LP, DeLong ER, et al. Proce-
dural volume as a marker of quality for CABG surgery.
JAMA . 2004;291:195 –201.
5.Shahian DM, O ’Brien SM, Normand SL, et al. Asso-
ciation of hospital coronary artery bypass volume withprocesses of care, mortality, morbidity, and the Soci-ety of Thoracic Surgeons composite quality score.J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2010;139:273 –282.
6.Wu C, Hannan EL, Ryan TJ, et al. Is the impact of
hospital and surgeon volumes on the in-hospitalmortality rate for coronary artery bypass graft sur-gery limited to patients at high risk? Circulation .
2004;110:784 –789.
7.Shahian DM, Jacobs JP, Edwards FH, et al. The so-
ciety of thoracic surgeons national database. Heart .
2013;99:1494 –1501 .
8.Campanella P, Vukovic V, Parente P, et al. The
impact of public reporting on clinical outcomes: asystematic review and meta-analysis. BMC Health Serv
Res. 2016;16:296 .
9.Harold JG, Bass TA, Bashore TM, et al. ACCF/AHA/
SCAI 2013 update of the clinical competence state-ment on coronary artery interventional procedures: a
report of the American College of Cardiology Foun-
dation/American Heart Association/American Col-lege of Physicians Task Force on Clinical Competenceand Training (Writing Committee to Revise the 2007Clinical Competence Statement on Cardiac Inter-ventional Procedures). J Am Coll Cardiol .2 0 1 3 ; 6 2 :
357–396.
10.Naidu SS, Aronow HD, Box LC, et al. SCAI expert
consensus statement: 2016 best practices in the car-
diac catheterization laboratory. Catheter Cardiovasc
Interv . 2016;88:407 –423.
11.Levine GN, Bates ER, Blankenship JC, et al. 2011
ACCF/AHA/SCAI guideline for percutaneous coronaryintervention: a report of the American College ofCardiology Foundation/American Heart AssociationTask Force on Practice Guidelines and the Society for
Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2011;58:e44 –e122 .
17. Unanswered Questions and Future Directions
1.Carnethon MR, Pu J, Howard G, et al. Cardiovascular
health in African Americans: a scienti ﬁc statement
from the American Heart Association. Circulation .
2017;136:e393 –e423 .
2.Bucholz EM, Ma S, Normand S-LT, et al. Race, so-
cioeconomic status, and life expectancy after acutemyocardial infarction. Circulation . 2015;132:1338 –
1346 .
3.Yong CM, Ungar L, Abnousi F, et al. Racial differ-
ences in quality of care and outcomes after acutecoronary syndrome. Am J Cardiol . 2018;121:1489 –
1495 .
4.Volgman AS, Palaniappan LS, Aggarwal NT, et al.
Atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease in South Asiansin the United States: epidemiology, risk factors, andtreatments: a scienti ﬁc statement from the American
Heart Association. Circulation . 2018;138:e1 –e34.JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee121

5.Jose PO, Frank ATH, Kapphahn KI, et al. Cardio-
vascular disease mortality in Asian Americans. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2014;64:2486 –2494 .
6.Brister SJ, Hamdulay Z, Verma S, et al. Ethnic di-
versity: South Asian ethnicity is associated withincreased coronary artery bypass grafting mortality.
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2007;133:150 –154.
7.Toor IS, Jaumdally R, Lip GYH, et al. Differences
between South Asians and White Europeans in ﬁve
year outcome following percutaneous coronary inter-vention. Int J Clin Pract . 2011;65:1259 –1266 .
8.Burton BN, Munir NA, Labastide AS, et al. An update
on racial disparities with 30-day outcomes after cor-onary artery bypass graft under the Affordable CareAct. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth . 2019;33:1890 –1898 .
9.Gupta T, Kolte D, Khera S, et al. Contemporary sex-
based differences by age in presenting characteristics,
use of an early invasive strategy, and inhospital mor-
tality in patients with non-ST-segment-elevationmyocardial infarction in the United States. Circ Car-
diovasc Interv . 2018;11:e005735 .
10.Zhang T, Tsang W, Wijeysundera HC, et al.
Reporting and representation of ethnic minorities incardiovascular trials: a systematic review. Am Heart J .
2013;166:52 –57.
11.Ortega RF, Yancy CW, Mehran R, et al. Overcoming
lack of diversity in cardiovascular clinical trials: a new
challenge and strategies for success. Circulation .
2019;140:1690 –1692 .
12.Velazquez EJ, Lee KL, Deja MA, et al. Coronary-
artery bypass surgery in patients with left ventriculardysfunction. N Engl J Med . 2011;364:1607 –1616 .
13.Petrie MC, Jhund PS, She L, et al. Ten-year out-
comes after coronary artery bypass grafting accordingto age in patients with heart failure and left ventricularsystolic dysfunction: an analysis of the extendedfollow-up of the STICH trial (Surgical Treatment for
Ischemic Heart Failure). Circulation . 2016;134:1314 –
1324 .
14.Velazquez EJ, Lee KL, Jones RH, et al.
Coronary-artery bypass surgery in patients withischemic cardiomyopathy. N Engl J Med . 2016;374:
1511 –1520 .
15.Bonow RO, Maurer G, Lee KL, et al. Myocardial
viability and survival in ischemic left ventriculardysfunction. N Engl J Med . 2011;364:1617 –1625 .
16.Orlandini A, Castellana N, Pascual A, et al.
Myocardial viability for decision-making concerning
revascularization in patients with left ventriculardysfunction and coronary artery disease: a meta-analysis of non-randomized and randomized studies.Int J Cardiol . 2015;182:494 –499.
17.Kunadian V, Zaman A, Qiu W. Revascularization
among patients with severe left ventricular dysfunc-tion: a meta-analysis of observational studies. Eur J
Heart Fail . 2011;13:773 –784.
18.Cortigiani L, Bigi R, Sicari R. Is viability still viable
after the STICH trial? Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging .
2012;13:219 –226.
19.Perera D, Clayton T, Petrie MC, et al.
Percutaneous revascularization for ischemic ventricu-
lar dysfunction: rationale and design of the REVIVED-
BCIS2 Trial: percutaneous coronary intervention forischemic cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll Cardiol HF .
2018;6:517 –526.20.ISCHEMIA Trial. Other Trials of Potential Interest.
Accessed October 13, 2021. https://www.ischemiatrial.
org/other-trials-potential-interest
21.Saw J, Aymong E, Mancini GBJ, et al. Non-
atherosclerotic coronary artery disease in youngwomen. Can J Cardiol . 2014;30:814 –819.
22.Tweet MS, Eleid MF, Best PJM, et al. Spontaneous
coronary artery dissection: revascularization versus
conservative therapy. Circ Cardiovasc Interv . 2014;7:
777–786.
23.Hayes SN, Kim ESH, Saw J, et al. Spontaneous
coronary artery dissection: current state of the science:
a scienti ﬁc statement from the American Heart Asso-
ciation. Circulation . 2018;137:e523 –e557 .
24.Crawley PD, Mahlow WJ, Huntsinger DR, et al.
Giant coronary artery aneurysms: review and update.
Tex Heart Inst J . 2014;41:603 –608.
25.Keyser A, Hilker MK, Husser O, et al. Giant coronary
aneurysms exceeding 5 cm in size. Interact Cardiovasc
Thorac Surg . 2012;15:33 –36.
26.Li Y-F, Zhang Z-W, Wang S-S, et al. Transcatheter
closure of congenital coronary artery ﬁstulas with a
giant coronary artery aneurysm in children: experi-ences from a single center. Chin Med J (Engl) .
2017;130:1919 –1925 .
27.Hirata K, Yagi N, Wake M, et al. Coronary steal due
to ruptured right coronary aneurysm causing myocar-
dial infarction in a patient with systemic lupus ery-thematosus. Cardiovasc Diagn Ther . 2014;4:333 –336.
28.Tarantini G, Migliore F, Cademartiri F, et al. Left
anterior descending artery myocardial bridging: aclinical approach. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2016;68:2887 –
2899 .
29.Gould KL, Johnson NP. Myocardial bridges: lessons
in clinical coronary pathophysiology. J Am Coll Cardiol
Img. 2015;8:705 –709.
30.Boyd JH, Pargaonkar VS, Scoville DH, et al. Sur-
gical unroo ﬁng of hemodynamically signi ﬁcant left
anterior descending myocardial bridges. Ann Thorac
Surg. 2017;103:1443 –1450 .
31.Mason PJ, Shah B, Tamis-Holland JE, et al. An
update on radial artery access and best practices fortransradial coronary angiography and intervention inacute coronary syndrome: a scienti ﬁc statement from
the American Heart Association. Circ Cardiovasc Interv .
2018;11:e000035 .
32.Gaudino M, Taggart D, Suma H, et al. The choice of
conduits in coronary artery bypass surgery. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2015;66:1729 –1737.
33.Ruzieh M, Moza A, Siddegowda Bangalore B, et al.
Effect of transradial catheterisation on patency ratesof radial arteries used as a conduit for coronary bypass.Heart Lung Circ . 2017;26:296 –300.
34.Kamiya H, Ushijima T, Kanamori T, et al. Use of the
radial artery graft after transradial catheterization: is it
suitable as a bypass conduit? Ann Thorac Surg .
2003;76:1505 –1509 .
35.Yonetsu T, Kakuta T, Lee T, et al. Assessment of
acute injuries and chronic intimal thickening of the
radial artery after transradial coronary intervention byoptical coherence tomography. Eur Heart J . 2010;31:
1608 –1615 .
36.Ahn J-M, Park D-W, Lee CW, et al. Comparison of
stenting versus bypass surgery according to thecompleteness of revascularization in severe coronary
artery disease: patient-level pooled analysis of theSYNTAX, PRECOMBAT, and BEST trials. J Am Coll
Cardiol Intv . 2017;10:1415 –1424 .
37.Ando T, Takagi H, Grines CL. Complete versus
incomplete revascularization with drug-eluting stents
for multi-vessel disease in stable, unstable angina or
non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction: ameta-analysis. J Interv Cardiol . 2017;30:309
–317.
38.Bangalore S, Guo Y, Samadashvili Z, et al. Out-
comes with complete versus incomplete revasculari-zation in patients with multivessel coronary diseaseundergoing percutaneous coronary intervention witheverolimus eluting stents. Am J Cardiol . 2020;125:
362–369.
39.Farooq V, Serruys PW, Garcia-Garcia HM, et al. The
negative impact of incomplete angiographic revascu-
larization on clinical outcomes and its association withtotal occlusions: the SYNTAX (Synergy BetweenPercutaneous Coronary Intervention with Taxus andCardiac Surgery) trial. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2013;61:282 –
294.
40.Zimarino M, Ricci F, Romanello M, et al. Complete
myocardial revascularization confers a larger clinical
beneﬁt when performed with state-of-the-art tech-
niques in high-risk patients with multivessel coronaryartery disease: a meta-analysis of randomized andobservational studies. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv .
2016;87:3 –12.
41.Schwartz L, Bertolet M, Feit F, et al. Impact of
completeness of revascularization on long-term car-diovascular outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes
mellitus: results from the Bypass Angioplasty Revas-
cularization Investigation 2 Diabetes (BARI 2D). Circ
Cardiovasc Interv . 2012;5:166 –173.
42.Head SJ, Davierwala PM, Serruys PW, et al. Coro-
nary artery bypass grafting vs. percutaneous coronaryintervention for patients with three-vessel disease:ﬁnalﬁve-year follow-up of the SYNTAX trial. Eur Heart
J. 2014;35:2821 –2830 .
43.Mehta SR, Wood DA, Storey RF, et al. Complete
revascularization with multivessel PCI for myocardial
infarction. N Engl J Med . 2019;381:1411 –1421.
44.Harskamp RE, Brennan JM, Xian Y, et al. Practice
patterns and clinical outcomes after hybrid coronaryrevascularization in the United States: an analysis fromthe society of thoracic surgeons adult cardiac data-base. Circulation . 2014;130:872 –879.
45.Tajstra M, Hrapkowicz T, Hawranek M, et al. Hybrid
coronary revascularization in selected patients withmultivessel disease: 5-year clinical outcomes of the
prospective randomized pilot study. J Am Coll Cardiol
Intv. 2018;11:847 –852.
46.Ga˛sior M, Zembala MO, Tajstra M, et al. Hybrid
revascularization for multivessel coronary artery dis-ease. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv . 2014;7:1277 –1283 .
47.Shen L, Hu S, Wang H, et al. One-stop hybrid cor-
onary revascularization versus coronary artery bypassgrafting and percutaneous coronary intervention for thetreatment of multivessel coronary artery disease: 3-year follow-up results from a single institution. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2013;61:2525 –
2533 .
48.Faroux L, Guimaraes L, Wintzer-Wehekind J, et al.
Coronary artery disease and transcatheter aortic valvereplacement: JACC state-of-the-art review. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2019;74:362 –372.Lawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e122

49.D’Ascenzo F, Verardi R, Visconti M, et al. Inde-
pendent impact of extent of coronary artery diseaseand percutaneous revascularisation on 30-day andone-year mortality after TAVI: a meta-analysis of
adjusted observational results. EuroIntervention .
2018;14:e1169 –e1177 .
50.Kotronias RA, Kwok CS, George S, et al. Trans-
catheter aortic valve implantation with or without
percutaneous coronary artery revascularization strat-egy: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JA m
Heart Assoc . 2017;6:e005960 .
51.Leon MB, Smith CR, Mack MJ, et al. Trans-
catheter or surgical aortic-valve replacement inintermediate-risk patients. N Engl J Med . 2016;374:
1609 –1620 .
52.Otto CM, Nishimura RA, Bonow RO, et al. 2020
ACC/AHA guideline for the management of patients
with valvular heart disease: a report of the AmericanCollege of Cardiology/American Heart AssociationJoint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2021;77:e25 –e197 .
53.McFalls EO, Ward HB, Moritz TE, et al. Coronary-
artery revascularization before elective major vascularsurgery. N Engl J Med . 2004;351:2795 –2804 .
54.Rao NN, Coates PT. Cardiovascular disease after
kidney transplant. Semin Nephrol . 2018;38:291 –297.KEY WORDS ACC/AHA Clinical Practice
Guidelines, percutaneous coronary intervention,angioplasty, coronary artery bypass graftsurgery, myocardial infarction, cardiac surgery,stent(s), angiogram, angiography, percutaneous
transluminal coronary angioplasty, coronary
atherosclerosis, saphenous vein graft, internalmammary artery graft, internal thoracic arterygraft, arterial graft, post-bypass, non –ST-
segment –elevated myocardial infarction, vein
graft lesions, myocardial revascularization,
multivessel PCI, left ventricular dysfunctionJACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee123

Committee Member Employment ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalPersonal
ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational, or
Other Financial
Bene ﬁtExpert
Witness
Jennifer S.
Lawton (Chair)Johns Hopkins Medicine —Professor and Chief of Cardiac
SurgeryNone None None None None None
Jacqueline E. Tamis-
Holland (Vice-
Chair/JCPG liaison)Mount Sinai Morningside Hospital —Associate Director, Cardiac
Catheterization Laboratory; Icahn School of Medicine at Mount
Sinai —Professor of MedicineNone None None None None None
Sripal Bangalore New York University School of Medicine,
The Leon H. Charney Division of Cardiology —Professor of
Medicine and Director, Complex Coronary Intervention;
Director of Research, Cardiac Catheterization Laboratory and
Director, Cardiovascular Outcomes GroupAbbott *
Amgen *
Biotronik
Meril
Pﬁzer
ReataSMTNone None Abbott *
Reata *None None
Eric R. Bates University of Michigan
Department of Internal Medicine —
Professor of Internal MedicineNone None None None None None
Theresa M. Beckie University of South Florida, Tampa —Professor and Associate
Dean PhD Program, College of Nursing
Professor, College of Medicine, Division of Cardiovascular
SciencesNone None None None None None
James M. Bischoff AHA Volunteer (Patient Representative) None None None None None None
John A. Bittl Advent Health Ocala,
Interventional Cardiology —Chief of Staff, Medical
Director of Surgical Services, Research, and EducationNone None None None None None
Mauricio G. Cohen
(TFDS liaison)University of Miami Hospital and Clinics —Professor of
Medicine and Director, Cardiac Catheterization
LaboratoryAbiomed *
AstraZeneca *
Medtronic *
Merit Medical *
Terumo MedicalZollNone Accumed
Radial
SystemsNone None None
J. Michael DiMaio Baylor Scott & White Health System —Medical Director of
Surgical ServicesNone None None None None None
Creighton W. Don
(SCAI
representative)VA Puget Sound Medical Center —Associate Professor of
Medicine and Section Chief Cardiology; University of
Washington Division of Cardiology —Director of the
Interventional Cardiology and Structural Heart FellowshipsSiemens None None None Abbott *
Boston Scienti ﬁc*
CSI*
Medtronic *
Spectranetics *None
Stephen E. Fremes
(AATS
representative )University of Toronto Schulich Heart Centre —Cardiovascular
Surgery ProfessorNone None None None Bayer †,‡
Edwards ‡
Medtronic ‡None
Mario F. Gaudino Weill Cornell Medicine
Professor/Surgeon —
Cardiothoracic SurgeryNone None None None None None
Zachary D. Goldberger University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health —
Associate Professor of Medicine,
Division of Cardiovascular Medicine/Electrophysiology;
University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health —
Associate Program Director, Clinical Electrophysiology
FellowshipNone None None None None None
Michael C. Grant The Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, The Armstrong
Institute for Patient Safety and Quality —Associate Professor,
Divisions of Cardiothoracic Anesthesia, Surgical Critical Care
and Acute Care Surgery and Core Faculty, Departments of
Anesthesiology/Critical Care Medicine and SurgeryNone None None None None None
Jang B. Jaswal National Ambassador for AHA (Patient Representative) None None None None None None
Paul A. Kurlansky Columbia University
College of Physicians and Surgeons —Associate Professor of
Surgery, Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery; Columbia
HeartSource —Director of Research, Recruitment and CQI;
Center for Innovation and Outcomes Research —Associate
DirectorNone None None None None None
Continued in the next columnAPPENDIX 1. AUTHOR RELATIONSHIPS WITH INDUSTRY AND OTHER ENTITIES (RELEVANT) —
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI GUIDELINE FOR CORONARY ARTERY REVASCULARIZATIONLawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e124

Committee Member Employment ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalPersonal
ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational, or
Other Financial
Bene ﬁtExpert
Witness
Roxana Mehran Mount Sinai —Professor in Cardiovascular
Clinical Research and Outcomes,
Professor of Medicine (Cardiology);
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
Population Health Science and Policy —Director of
Interventional Cardiovascular Research and Clinical TrialsBayer
Boston
Scienti ﬁc
Janssen
PharmaceuticalsNone Claret *
Boston
Scienti ﬁc*
Controlrad *
Elixir Medical *Abbott *
Abiomed *
AstraZeneca *
Bayer *None None
Thomas S. Metkus Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine —Assistant
Professor of Medicine and Surgery, Division of Cardiology,
Department of Medicine and Division of Cardiac Surgery
Department of SurgeryNone None None None None None
Lorraine C. Nnacheta § American Heart Association/American College of
Cardiology —Guideline AdvisorNone None None None AHA/ACC
salaried
employeeNone
Sunil V. Rao Duke University Health System —Professor of Medicine and
Section Chief, CardiologyNone None None Amgen *
Bayer
Shockwave
Medical
Svelte
MedicalNone None
Frank W. Sellke Alpert Medical School of Brown University and Rhode Island
Hospital —Director of the Cardiovascular Institute and Karl
Karlson Professor and Chief of Cardiothoracic SurgeryStryker None None Bayer † None None
Garima Sharma Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Department of
Medicine, Ciccarone Center for the Prevention of
Cardiovascular Disease,
Division of Cardiology —Assistant Professor of Medicine and
Director of Cardio-Obstetrics ProgramNone None None None None None
Celina M. Yong Stanford University School of Medicine —Assistant Professor,
Division of Cardiovascular Medicine; VA Palo Alto Health care
System —Director of Interventional CardiologyNone None None None None None
Brittany A.
ZwischenbergerDuke University —Assistant Professor,
Division of Cardiothoracic SurgeryNone None None None None None
This table represents the relationships of committee members with industry and other entities that were determined to be relevant to this document. T hese relationships were reviewed and
updated in conjunction with all meetings and/or conference calls of the writing committee during the document development process. The table does no t necessarily re ﬂect relationships with
industry at the time of publication. A person is deemed to have a signi ﬁcant interest in a business if the interest represents ownership of $5% of the voting stock or share of the business entity, or
ownership of $$5,000 of the fair market value of the business entity; or if funds received by the person from the business entity exceed 5% of the person ’s gross income for the previous year.
Relationships that exist with no ﬁnancial bene ﬁt are also included for the purpose of transparency. Relationships in this table are modest unless otherwise noted.
According to the ACC/AHA, a person has a relevant relationship IF: a) the relationship or interest relates to the same or similar subject matter, intellectual property or asset, topic, or issue
addressed in the document; or b) the company/entity (with whom the relationship exists) makes a drug, drug class, or device addressed in the document or makes a competing drug or device
addressed in the document ; or c) the person or a member of the person ’s household , has a reasonable potential for ﬁnancial, professional or other personal gain or loss as a result of the issues/
content addressed in the document . Writing committee members are required to recuse themselves from voting on sections to which their speci ﬁc relationships with industry and other entities
may apply.
*Signi ﬁcant relationship.
†Noﬁnancial bene ﬁt.
‡This disclosure was entered under the Clinical Trial Enroller category in the ACC ’s disclosure system. To appear in this category, the author acknowledges that there is no direct orinstitutional
relationship with the trial sponsor as de ﬁned in the (ACCF or ACC/AHA) Disclosure Policy for Writing Committees.
§Lorraine Nnacheta is an AHA/ACC joint staff member and acts as the guideline advisor for the “2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Guideline for Coronary Artery Revascularization. ”No relevant relationships to
report. Non-voting author on recommendations and not included/counted in the RWI balance for this committee.
AATS indicates American Association for Thoracic Surgery; ACC, American College of Cardiology; ACCF, American College of Cardiology Foundation; A HA, American Heart Association; CQI,
Continuous Quality Improvement; JCPG, Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines; RWI, relationships with industry and other entities; SCAI , Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and
Interventions; TFDS, ACC/AHA Task Force for Clinical Data Standards; and VA, Veterans Affairs.APPENDIX 1. CONTINUEDJACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee125

APPENDIX 2. REVIEWER RELATIONSHIPS WITH INDUSTRY AND OTHER ENTITIES (COMPREHENSIVE) —2021
ACC/AHA/SCAI GUIDELINE FOR CORONARY REVASCULARIZATION (JANUARY 2021)
Reviewer Representation Employment ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalPersonal
ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational,
or Other
Financial Bene ﬁtExpert
Witness
Anastasia L.
ArmbrusterContent Reviewer —Joint Committee
on Clinical Practice GuidelinesUniversity of Health
Sciences and
Pharmacy in St.
LouisNone AstraZeneca None None None None
Joshua A. Beckman Of ﬁcial Reviewer —Joint Committee
on Clinical Practice GuidelinesVanderbilt
University Medical
CenterAmgen
JanOne
JanssenPharmaceuticals *None EMX †
JanaCare †
VIA*Bayer (DSMB)
Novartis (DSMB)Amgen None
Kim K. Birtcher Content Reviewer —Joint Committee
on Clinical Practice GuidelinesUniversity of
Houston College of
PharmacyJones & Bartlett
LearningNone None None None None
Lynne T. Braun Content Reviewer —ACC/AHA Rush University
(Retired)None None None None AHA †
PCNA †
UptoDateNone
Edward Butler Lay Reviewer Lay Stakeholder
Representative
Retired, Mint Hill,
NCNone None None None None None
Anita Deswal Content Reviewer —Joint Committee
on Clinical Practice GuidelinesUniversity of Texas
MD Anderson
Cancer CenterNone None None None ACC
AHANone
Dave L. Dixon Content Reviewer —Joint Committee
on Clinical Practice GuidelinesVirginia
Commonwealth
University
School of PharmacyAmerican
Pharmacists
AssociationNone None Centers for
Disease Control
and Prevention *
Community
Pharmacy
Foundation *Accreditation
Council for
Lipidology †
American College
of Pharmacy
Cardiology
Practice Research
Network †
National Lipid
Association †None
David Faxon Content Reviewer —ACC/AHA Brigham and
Women ’s HospitalBoston Scienti ﬁc
CSL Behring *None None Boston Scienti ﬁc
(DSMB)
CSL Behring
(DSMB)
Medtronic †Akenia
Therapeutics *
Medtronic
REVA MedicalNone
Lisa de las
FuentesContent Reviewer —Joint Committee
on Clinical Practice GuidelinesWashington
University in St.
LouisAcceleron
Altavant
Arena
BayerExpress Scripts
Gossamer
Johnson &
Johnson
Phase Bio
V-wave
VaderisWebMD *Simply
Speaking *None Acceleron *
Altavant *
Bayer
Complexa *
Foundation for
the National
Institutes of
Health
Johnson &
Johnson *
Liquidia *
Medtronic *
NIH*
Reata *
Trio Analytics
UnitedTherapeutics *
University of
Kentucky
(DSMB) †
University of
Toronto (DSMB) †ACC †
AHA †
Circulation
Journals
Pulmonary
Hypertension
AssociationNone
Kirk N. Garratt Of ﬁcial Reviewer —SCAI ChristianaCare None None LifeCuff
Technologies *Abbott (DSMB) *
Jarvik Heart
(DSMB)None None
Continued in the next columnLawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e126

APPENDIX 2. CONTINUED
Reviewer Representation Employment ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalPersonal
ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational,
or Other
Financial Bene ﬁtExpert
Witness
Zachary D.
GoldbergerContent Reviewer —Joint Committee
on Clinical Practice GuidelinesAssociate Professor,
University of
Wisconsin-Madison,
School of Medicine
and Public HealthNone None None None None None
Bulent Gorenek Content Reviewer —Joint Committee
on Clinical Practice GuidelinesEskisehir Osmangazi
UniversityAstraZeneca
SandozNone None None None None
Robert Guyton Of ﬁcial Reviewer —STS Emory University Edwards
LifesciencesNone None Edwards
Lifesciences †
NIH†Boston Scienti ﬁc*
Edwards
Lifesciences *‡
Medtronic ‡None
Norissa Haynes Content Reviewer —Joint Committee
on Clinical Practice GuidelinesUniversity of
PennsylvaniaNone None None None None None
Adrian F.
HernandezContent Reviewer —Joint Committee
on Clinical Practice GuidelinesDuke University Amgen
AstraZeneca *
BayerBiofourmis
Boehringer
Ingelheim
Boston
Scienti ﬁc*
Cytokinetics
Daiichi Sankyo
Eli Lilly
Merck *
Myokardia
Novartis *
Pﬁzer
Relypsa
Sanoﬁ-aventis *
XogenexNone None American Regent
AstraZeneca *
Eidos (DSMB)Genentech
GlaxoSmithKline *
Janssen
Pharmaceuticals
MerckNIH†
Novartis *
PCORI †
Verily *AHA †
AstraZeneca
Boston Scienti ﬁc
CSL Behring
Janssen
Pharmaceuticals *
Merck
NovartisGenentech *
Relypsa
Sanoﬁ-aventisDefendant,
Patent
Dispute,
2019
Jose A. Joglar Content Reviewer —Joint Committee
on Clinical Practice GuidelinesUT Southwestern
Medical CenterNone None None None None None
W. Schuyler Jones Content Reviewer —Joint Committee
on Clinical Practice GuidelinesDuke University Amgen
Bayer
Janssen
Pharmaceuticals *
PﬁzerNone None Bristol Myers
Squibb *
PCORIAbbott *
Amgen
AstraZeneca
Boehringer
Ingelheim
CardiovascularSystems Inc. *
Janssen
Pharmaceuticals
ZOLL MedicalNone
Andrew M. Kates Content Reviewer —ACC/AHA Washington
University School of
MedicineNone None None None None None
Jim LoFaso Lay Reviewer Veeco; Solomon
Page (Contactor)None None None None None None
Thomas
MacGillivrayContent Reviewer —ACC/AHA Houston Methodist
HospitalNone None None None Xylocor
Therapeutics ‡None
Daniel B. Mark Content Reviewer —Joint Committee
on Clinical Practice GuidelinesDuke University None None None HeartFlow *
MerckHeartFlow *
Merck *
None
Sara C. Martinez Content Reviewer —ACC Providence Health
and ServicesNone None None None Abiomed
Boston Scienti ﬁc
Novartis
Maquet
CardiovascularNone
Continued on the next pageJACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee127

APPENDIX 2. CONTINUED
Reviewer Representation Employment ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalPersonal
ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational,
or Other
Financial Bene ﬁtExpert
Witness
Venu Menon Content Reviewer —ACC/AHA Cleveland Clinic None None None None Novartis † None
L. Kristin Newby Content Reviewer —ACC/AHA Duke University Beckman-
Coulter
Bristol-Myers
SquibbCSL
Medtronic
NHLBI
Quidel
Roche
DiagnosticsNone None BioKier
Boehringer
Ingelheim
CDCDavid H.
Murdock
Institute for
Business
and Culture
NIH*
North CarolinaDHHSAHA †
ACC, Oregon
Chapter
AstraZeneca †
Boehringer
Ingelheim
David H. Murdock
Research
Institute †
JACC , Deputy
Editor *None
Michelle
O’DonoghueContent Reviewer —ACC/AHA Brigham and
Women ’s HospitalAmgen
CVS CaremarkJanssen
Pharmaceuticals
NovartisNone None Amgen *
AstraZeneca(DSMB) *
Eisai*
Intarcia *
Janssen
Pharmaceuticals *
The Medicines
Company/
Novartis *Kowa
PharmaceuticalsNone
Patrick T. O ’Gara Content Reviewer —Joint Committee
on Clinical Practice GuidelinesBrigham and
Women ’
s HospitalNone None None None Edwards
Lifesciences †
Medtrace †
Medtronic †
JAMA Cardiology *
NIH*None
Latha P.
PalaniappanContent Reviewer —Joint Committee
on Clinical Practice GuidelinesStanford Concierge
and Executive
MedicineNational
Minority
Cardiovascular
AllianceNone None NIH * None None
Mariann R. Piano Content Reviewer —Joint Committee
on Clinical Practice GuidelinesVanderbilt
UniversityNone None None None None None
Marc Ruel Of ﬁcial Reviewer —AHA University of
Ottawa Heart
InstituteEdwards
Lifesciences
MedtronicNone None Cryolife
Medtronic *None None
Jorge F. Saucedo Of ﬁcial Reviewer —AHA Medical College of
WisconsinNone None None None B. Braun
Interventional
Systems Inc.None
Erica S. Spatz Content Reviewer —Joint Committee
on Clinical Practice GuidelinesYale University
School of MedicineNone None None FDA * None None
Elaine Tseng Content Reviewer —ACC/AHA University of
California San
Francisco and San
Francisco VA
Medical CenterNone None ReValve Med †NIH* AATS †
AHA †
Cryolife ‡*
Edwards
Lifesciences
Journal of HeartDisease Valve †
Medtronic
STS†
University of
California
Zimmer BiometNone
Continued in the next columnLawton et al JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guideline JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129e128

APPENDIX 2. CONTINUED
Reviewer Representation Employment ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalPersonal
ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational,
or Other
Financial Bene ﬁtExpert
Witness
Saraschandra
VallabhajosyulaContent Reviewer —AHA Emory University
School of MedicineNone None None None None None
Y. Joseph Woo Content Reviewer —Joint Committee
on Clinical Practice GuidelinesStanford University
School of MedicineNone None None None NIH * None
Marco Zenati Of ﬁcial Reviewer —AATS Harvard Medical
SchoolNone None None NIH * None None
This table represents all relationships of reviewers with industry and other entities that were reported at the time of peer review, including those n ot deemed to be relevant to this document, at
the time this document was under review. The table does not necessarily re ﬂect relationships with industry at the time of publication. A person is deemed to have a signi ﬁcant interest in a business
if the interest represents ownership of $5% of the voting stock or share of the business entity, or ownership of $$5000 of the fair market value of the business entity; or if funds received by the
person from the business entity exceed 5% of the person ’s gross income for the previous year. Relationships that exist with no ﬁnancial bene ﬁt are also included for the purpose of transparency.
Relationships in this table are modest unless otherwise noted. Names are listed in alphabetical order within each category of review. Please refer to https://www.acc.org/guidelines/about-
guidelines-and-clinical-documents/ relationships-with-industry-policy for de ﬁnitions of disclosure categories or additional information about the ACC/AHA Disclosure Policy for Writing
Committees.
*Signi ﬁcant relationship.
†Noﬁnancial bene ﬁt.
‡This disclosure was entered under the Clinical Trial Enroller category in the ACC ’s disclosure system. To appear in this category, the individual acknowledges that there is no direct or institutional
relationship with the trial sponsor as de ﬁned in the (ACCF or AHA/ACC) Disclosure Policy for Writing Committees.
AATS indicates American Association for Thoracic Surgery; ACC, American College of Cardiology; ACCF, American College of Cardiology Foundation; A HA, American Heart Association; CQI,
Continuous Quality Improvement; JCPG, Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines; RWI, relationships with industry and other entities; SCAI , Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and
Interventions; TFDS, ACC/AHA Task Force for Clinical Data Standards; and VA, Veterans Affairs.JACC VOL. 79, NO. 2, 2022 Lawton et al
JANUARY 18, 2022:e21 –e129 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Coronary Revascularization Guidelinee129