CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINE
2022 ACC/AHA Guideline for the
Diagnosis and Management of
Aortic Disease
A Report of the American Heart Association/American College of Cardiology
Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines
Developed in collaboration with and endorsed by the American Association for Thoracic Surgery,
American College of Radiology, Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists,
Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, Society of Thoracic Surgeons,
and Society for Vascular Surgery
Endorsed by the Society of Interventional Radiology and Society for Vascular Medicine
Writing
Committee
Members *Eric M. Isselbacher, MD, MS C, FACC, Chair
Ourania Preventza, MD, MBA, Vice Chair
James Hamilton Black III, MD, DFSVS, Vice Chair
John G. Augoustides, MD, FAHA y
Adam W. Beck, MD, DFSVSMichael A. Bolen, MD z
Alan C. Braverman, MD, FACCBruce E. Bray, MD, FACC x
Maya M. Brown-Zimmerman, MPH jj
Edward P. Chen, MD, FAHA
Tyrone J. Collins, MD, MSCAI, FACC, FAHA, FSVM {
Abe DeAnda J
R, MD, FAHA
Christina L. Fanola, MD, MS C
Leonard N. Girardi, MD, FAHA#
Caitlin W. Hicks, MD, MS, FSVS **
Dawn S. Hui, MDWilliam Schuyler Jones, MD, FACC yy
Vidyasagar Kalahasti, MD, FACC
Karen M. Kim, MD, MS zzDianna M. Milewicz, MD, P
HD
Gustavo S. Oderich, MD
Laura Ogbechie, MSN
Susan B. Promes, MD, MBAElsie Gyang Ross, MD, MS
C
Marc L. Schermerhorn, MD, DFSVS xx
Sabrina Singleton Times, DHS C, MPH jjjj
Elaine E. Tseng, MD, FAHAGrace J. Wang, MD, MSCEY. Joseph Woo, MD, FACC, FAHA yy
*Writing committee members are required to recuse themselves from
voting on sections to which their speci ﬁc relationships with industry may
apply; see Appendix 1 for detailed information. ySCA representative. zACR
representative. xAHA/ACC Joint Committee on Clinical Data Standards
liaison. jjLay stakeholder representative. {SCAI representative. #AATS
representative. **ACC/AHA Joint Committee on Performance Measuresliaison. yyAHA/ACC Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines
liaison. zzSTS representative. xxSVS representative. jjjjAHA/ACC staff
representative.
ISSN 0735-1097/$36.00 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2022.08.004This document was approved by the American College of Cardiology Clinical Policy Approval Committee and the American Heart Association Science
Advisory and Coordinating Committee in July 2022, the American College of Cardiology Science and Quality Committee in August 2022, and the
American Heart Association Executive Committee in September 2022.
The American College of Cardiology requests that this document be cited as follows: Isselbacher EM, Preventza O, Black JH 3rd, Augoustides JG, Beck
AW, Bolen MA, Braverman AC, Bray BE, Brown-Zimmerman MM, Chen EP, Collins TJ, DeAnda A Jr, Fanola CL, Girardi LN, Hicks CW, Hui DS, Jones WS,Kalahasti V, Kim KM, Milewicz DM, Oderich GS, Ogbechie L, Promes SB, Ross EG, Schermerhorn ML, Times SS, Tseng EE, Wang GJ, Woo YJ. 2022 ACC/AHA guideline for the diagnosis and management of aortic disease: a report of the American Heart Association/American College of Cardiology JointCommittee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2022;80:e223-e393.
This article has been copublished in Circulation .
Copies: This document is available on the websites of the American College of Cardiology ( www.acc.org ) and the American Heart Association
(professional.heart.org ). For copies of this document, please contact the Elsevier Inc. Reprint Department via fax (212-633-3820) or e-mail ( reprints@
elsevier.com ).
Permissions: Multiple copies, modi ﬁcation, alteration, enhancement, and/or distribution of this document are not permitted without the express
permission of the American College of Cardiology. Requests may be completed online via the Elsevier site ( http://www.elsevier.com/about/policies/
author-agreement/obtaining-permission ).JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN COLLEGE OF CARDIOLOGY VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
ª2022 BY THE AMERICAN COLLEGE OF CARDIOLOGY FOUNDATION
AND THE AMERICAN HEART ASSOCIATION, INC.PUBLISHED BY ELSEVIER

Peer
ReviewCommitteeMembersDavid P. Faxon, MD, FACC, Chair
Gilbert R. Upchurch J R, MD, FAHA, FACC, Vice Chair
Aaron W. Aday, MD, MS C, FAHA
Ali Azizzadeh, MDMichael Boisen, MD y
Beau Hawkins, MD, FACC {
Christopher M. Kramer, MD, FACC, FAHAJessica G.Y. Luc, MDThomas E. MacGillivray, MD zzS. Christopher Malaisrie, MD, FACC #
Kathryn Osteen, P
HD, RN, CMSRN, CNE
Himanshu J. Patel, MD, FACC, FAHAParag J. Patel, MD {{
Wanda M. Popescu, MD
Evelio Rodriguez, MD, FACC
Rebecca Sorber, MDPhilip S. Tsao, P
HD
Annabelle Santos Volgman, MD, FACC, FAHA
AHA/ACC Joint
CommitteeMembersJoshua A. Beckman, MD, MS, FAHA, FACC, Chair
Catherine M. Otto, MD, FAHA, FACC, Chair-Elect
Patrick T. O ’Gara, MD, MACC, FAHA, Immediate Past
Chair ##
Anastasia Armbruster, P HARM D, FACC
Kim K. Birtcher, P HARM D, MS, FACC ##
Lisa de las Fuentes, MD, MS, FAHA
Anita Deswal, MD, MPH, FACC, FAHA
Dave L. Dixon, P HARM D, FACC, FAHA ##
Bulent Gorenek, MD, FACCNorrisa Haynes, MD, MPHAdrian F. Hernandez, MD, MHS, FAHA
José A. Joglar, MD, FACC, FAHA ##
W. Schuyler Jones, MD, FACCDaniel Mark, MD, MPH, FACC, FAHA ##
Debabrata Mukherjee, MD, FACC, FAHA, FSCAILatha Palaniappan, MD, MS, FACC, FAHAMariann R. Piano, RN, P
HD, FAHA
Tanveer Rab, MD, FACC
Erica S. Spatz, MD, MS, FACC
J a c q u e l i n eE .T a m i s - H o l l a n d ,M D ,F A H A ,F A C C ,F S C A IY. Joseph Woo, MD, FACC, FAHA
ABSTRACT
AIM The “2022 ACC/AHA Guideline for the Diagnosis and Management of Aortic Disease ”provides recommendations to guide cli-
nicians in the diagnosis, genetic evaluation and family screening, medical therapy, endovascular and surgical treatment, and long-term surveillance of patients with aortic disease across its multiple clinical presentation subsets (ie, asymptomatic, stable symp-tomatic, and acute aortic syndromes).
METHODS A comprehensive literature search was conducted from January 2021 to April 2021, encompassing studies, reviews, and
other evidence conducted on human subjects that were published in English from PubMed, EMBASE, the Cochrane Library, CINHLComplete, and other selected databases relevant to this guideline. Additional relevant studies, published through June 2022 duringthe guideline writing process, were also considered by the writing committee, where appropriate.
STRUCTURE Recommendations from previously published AHA/ACC guidelines on thoracic aortic disease, peripheral artery dis-
ease, and bicuspid aortic valve disease have been updated with new evidence to guide clinicians. In addition, new recommendations
addressing comprehensive care for patients with aortic disease have been developed. There is added emphasis on the role of shared
decision making, especially in the management of patients with aortic disease both before and during pregnancy. The is also anincreased emphasis on the importance of institutional interventional volume and multidisciplinary aortic team expertise in the care ofpatients with aortic disease.
CONTENTS
ABSTRACT .................................... e224
TOP 10 TAKE-HOME MESSAGES ................. e226
PREAMBLE .................................... e227
1. INTRODUCTION ............................ e228
1.1. Methodology and Evidence Review ......... e2281.2. Organization of the Writing Committee ...... e228
1.3. Document Review and Approval ............ e229
1.4. Scope of the Guideline .................... e229
1.5. Class of Recommendations and
Level of Evidence ........................ e229
1.6. Abbreviations ........................... e230{{SIR representative.
##Former Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guideline member,
current member during the writing effort.Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e224

2. NORMAL ANATOMY, ABNORMAL ANATOMY,
AND DEFINITIONS .......................... e231
2.1. Normal Aortic Anatomy ................... e231
2.2. Aortic Landing Zones ..................... e231
2.3. De ﬁnitions of Dilation and Aneurysm of the
Aortic Root and Ascending Thoracic Aorta .... e231
2.3.1. Normalizing Aortic Root and Ascending
Aortic Diameters for Body Size ........ e234
2.4. De ﬁnitions and Classi ﬁcation of Acute Aortic
Syndrome (AAS) ......................... e236
2.5. Classi ﬁcation of Thoracoabdominal Aortic
Aneurysm (TAAA) ........................ e240
2.6. Classi ﬁcation of Endoleaks ................ e240
3. IMAGING AND MEASUREMENTS .............. e242
3.1. Aortic Imaging Techniques to Determine
Presence and Progression of Aortic Disease ...e242
3.2. Conventions of Measurements ............. e245
3.2.1. Computed Tomography .............. e246
3.2.2. Magnetic Resonance Imaging ......... e246
3.2.3. Echocardiography ................... e246
3.2.4. Intravascular Ultrasound ............. e247
3.2.5. Abdominal Ultrasound ............... e247
4. MULTIDISCIPLINARY AORTIC TEAMS ......... e247
5. SHARED DECISION-MAKING ................. e250
6. ANEURYSMS ............................... e250
6.1. Thoracic Aortic Aneurysm (TAA) Causes ..... e250
6.1.1. Sporadic and Degenerative TAA ....... e253
6.1.2. Genetic Aortopathies ................ e253
6.1.3. BAV Aortopathy .................... e268
6.2. AAA: Cause, Risk Factors, and Screening ..... e271
6.3. Growth and Natural History of
Aortic Aneurysms ........................ e273
6.4. Medical Management of Sporadic and
Degenerative Aortic Aneurysm Disease ...... e273
6.4.1. Medical Therapy and Risk Factor
Modi ﬁcation in Sporadic TAA ......... e273
6.4.2. Medical Therapy and Risk Factor
Modi ﬁcation in AAA ................ e276
6.4.3. Surveillance for Medical Management ..e279
6.5. Surgical and Endovascular Management of
Aortic Aneurysms ........................ e281
6.5.1. Surgery for Sporadic Aneurysms of the
Aortic Root and Ascending Aorta ...... e281
6.5.2. Aortic Arch Aneurysms .............. e284
6.5.3. Descending TAA .................... e286
6.5.4. Thoracoabdominal Aortic Aneurysms ..e2916.5.5. Abdominal Aortic Aneurysms ......... e295
6.5.6. Surveillance After Aneurysm Repair ...e302
7.ACUTE AORTIC SYNDROMES ................ e304
7.1. Presentation ............................ e304
7.2. AAS: Diagnostic Evaluation (Imaging,
Laboratory Testing) ...................... e305
7.3. Medical Management of AAS ............... e306
7.3.1. Acute Medical Management of AAS .... e306
7.3.2. Subsequent Medical Management of
AAS .............................. e307
7.4. Surgical and Endovascular Management of
Acute Aortic Dissection ................... e307
7.4.1. Acute Type A Aortic Dissection ........ e308
7.4.2. Management of Acute Type B
Aortic Dissection ................... e313
7.5. Management of IMH ..................... e315
7.6. Management of PAU ...................... e317
7.6.1. PAU With IMH, Rupture, or Both ...... e317
7.6.2. Isolated PAU ....................... e318
7.6.3. PAU Open Surgical Repair Versus
Endovascular Repair ................ e320
7.7. Traumatic Aortic Injury ................... e320
7.7.1. Initial Management of Blunt Traumatic
Thoracic Aortic Injury (BTTAI) ........ e320
7.7.2. Initial Management of Blunt Traumatic
Abdominal Aortic Injury (BAAI) ....... e323
7.7.3. Long-Term Management and Surveillance
After Blunt Traumatic Aortic
Injury (BTAI) ....................... e326
7.8. Long-Term Management and Surveillance
Imaging After AAS ....................... e326
7.8.1. Long-Term Surveillance Imaging After
Aortic Dissection and IMH ............ e326
7.8.2. Long-Term Management After Acute
Aortic Dissection and IMH ............ e327
7.8.3. Long-Term Management and
Surveillance for PAUs ............... e327
8.PREGNANCY IN PATIENTS WITH
AORTOPATHY .............................. e328
8.1. Counseling and Management of Aortic Disease in
Pregnancy and Postpartum ................ e328
8.2. Delivery in Pregnant Patients With
Aortopathy ............................. e330
8.3. Surgery Before Pregnancy in Women With
Aortic Disease ........................... e331
8.4. Pregnancy in Patients With Aortopathy: Aortic
Dissection and Aortic Surgery in Pregnancy ..e333
9.OTHER AORTIC CONDITIONS ................ e334
9.1. In ﬂammatory Aortitis: Diagnosis and
Treatment of Takayasu Arteritis and
Giant Cell Arteritis (GCA) .................. e334JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee225

9.2. Infectious Aortitis ........................ e339
9.2.1. Diagnosis and Management of
Infection of the Native Aorta ......... e339
9.2.2. Diagnosis and Management of
Prosthetic Aortic Graft Infection ....... e341
9.3. Atherosclerotic Disease ................... e343
9.3.1. Aortic Thrombus ................... e343
9.3.2. Aortic Occlusion .................... e344
9.3.3. Porcelain Aorta ..................... e344
9.4. Coarctation of the Aorta (CoA) and
Congenital Abnormalities of the Arch ........ e344
9.4.1. Coarctation of the Aorta ............. e345
9.4.2. Other Arch Abnormalities ............ e346
9.5. Tumors ................................ e349
10. PHYSICAL ACTIVITY AND QUALITY OF LIFE ...e350
11. COST AND VALUE CONSIDERATIONS ......... e351
12. EVIDENCE GAPS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS ...e352
12.1. Biomarker Studies ....................... e352
12.2. Genetic and Nongenetic Factors ........... e352
12.3. Biomechanics of the Aorta ................ e352
12.4. Sex, Race, and Ethnicity .................. e352
12.5. Quality of Life in Patients With Aortic
Disease ................................ e353
12.6. New Endovascular Technology ............ e353
12.7. Optimal Exercise and Rehabilitation
Protocols .............................. e353
12.8. Equitable Care and Training Opportunities ...e353
REFERENCES ................................. e354
APPENDIX 1
Author Relationships With Industry and Other
Entities (Relevant) ........................... e387
APPENDIX 2
Reviewer Relationships With Industry and Other
Entities (Comprehensive) ..................... e391
TOP 10 TAKE-HOME MESSAGES FOR
THE DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OFAORTIC DISEASE
1. Because outcomes for patients with aortic disease
are enhanced at programs with higher volumes,experienced practitioners, and extensive management
capabilities, Multidisciplinary Aortic Team care isconsidered in determining the appropriate timing ofintervention.
2. Shared decision-making involving the patient and a
multidisciplinary team is highly encouraged to
determine the optimal medical, endovascular, andopen surgical therapies. In patients with aortic diseasewho are contemplating pregnancy or who are preg-nant, shared decision-making is especially importantwhen considering the cardiovascular risks of preg-nancy, the diameter thresholds for prophylactic aorticsurgery, and the mode of delivery.
3. Computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging,
and echocardiographic imaging of patients with aorticdisease should follow recommended approaches forimage acquisition, measurement and reporting ofrelevant aortic dimensions, and the frequency ofsurveillance before and after intervention.
4. At centers with Multidisciplinary Aortic Teams and
experienced surgeons, the threshold for surgical
intervention for sporadic aortic root and ascending
aortic aneurysms has been lowered from 5.5 cm to 5.0cm in selected patients, and even lower in speci ﬁc
scenarios among patients with heritable thoracicaortic aneurysms.
5. In patients who are signi ﬁcantly smaller or taller than
average, surgical thresholds may incorporate indexingof the aortic root or ascending aortic diameter to
either patient body surface area or height, or aortic
cross-sectional area to patient height.
6. Rapid aortic root growth or ascending aortic aneurysm
growth, an indication for intervention, is de ﬁned
as$0.5 cm in 1 year or $0 . 3c mp e ry e a ri n2c o n s e c -
utive years for those with sporadic aneurysmsand$0.3 cm in 1 year for those with heritable thoracic
aortic disease or bicuspid aortic valve.
7. In patients undergoing aortic root replacement sur-
gery, valve-sparing aort ic root replacement is
reasonable if the valve is suitable for repair and whenperformed by experienced surgeons in a Multidisci-plinary Aortic Team.
8. Patients with acute type A aortic dissection, if clini-
cally stable, should be considered for transfer to ahigh-volume aortic center to improve survival. The
operative repair of type A aortic dissection should
entail at least an open distal anastomosis rather thanjust a simple supracorona ry interposition graft.
9. There is an increasing role for thoracic endovascular
aortic repair in the management of uncomplicatedtype B aortic dissection. Clinical trials of repair ofthoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms with endograftsIsselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e226

are reporting results that suggest endovascular repair
is an option for patients with suitable anatomy.
10. In patients with aneurysms of the aortic root or
ascending aorta, or those with aortic dissection,screening of ﬁrst-degree relatives with aortic imaging
is recommended.
PREAMBLE
Since 1980, the American College of Cardiology (ACC)
and American Heart Association (AHA) have translatedscienti ﬁc evidence into clinical practice guidelines with
recommendations to improve cardiovascular health.
These guidelines, which are based on systematic methods
to evaluate and classify evidence, provide a foundationfor the delivery of quality cardiovascular care. The ACCand AHA sponsor the development and publication ofclinical practice guidelines without commercial support,and members volunteer their time to the writing andreview efforts. Guidelines are of ﬁcial policy of the
ACC and AHA. For some guidelines, the ACC and AHA
collaborate with other organizations.
Intended Use
Clinical practice guidelin es provide recommendations
applicable to patients with or at risk of developing car-diovascular disease. The focus is on medical practice inthe United States, but these guidelines are relevant topatients throughout the world. Although guidelines may
be used to inform regulatory or payer decisions, the intent
is to improve quality of care and align with patients ’in-
terests. Guidelines are intended to de ﬁne practices
meeting the needs of patient s in most, but not all, cir-
cumstances and should not re place clinical judgment.
Clinical Implementation
Management, in accordance with guideline recommen-
dations, is effective only when followed by both practi-tioners and patients. Adherence to recommendations canbe enhanced by shared decision-making between clini-cians and patients, with patient engagement in selectinginterventions on the basis of individual values, prefer-
ences, and associated conditions and comorbidities.
Methodology and Modernization
The AHA/ACC Joint Committee on Clinical Practice
Guidelines (Joint Committee) continuously reviews,updates, and modi ﬁes guideline methodology on
the basis of published standards from organizations,including the Institute of Medicine,
1,2and on the
basis of internal reevaluation. Similarly, presentationand delivery of guidelines are reevaluated and
modi ﬁed in response to evolving technologies and
other factors to optimally facilitate dissemination ofinformation to health care professionals at the pointof care.
Numerous modi ﬁcations to the guidelines have
been implemented to make them shorter and enhance“user friendliness. ”Guidelines are written and pre-
sented in a modular, “knowledge chunk ”format, in
which each chunk includes a table of recommenda-
tions, a brief synopsis, recommendation-speci ﬁcs u p -
portive text and, when appropriate, ﬂow diagrams or
additional tables. Hyperlinked references are providedfor each modular knowledge chunk to facilitate quickaccess and review.
In recognition of the importance of cost –value consid-
erations, in certain guidelines, when appropriate and
feasible, an analysis of value for a drug, device, or inter-
vention may be performed in accordance with the ACC/AHA methodology.
3
To ensure that guideline recommendations remain
current, new data will be reviewed on an ongoing basis bythe writing committee and staff. Going forward, targetedsections/knowledge chunks will be revised dynamically
after publication and timely peer review of potentially
practice-changing science. The previous designations of
“full revision ”and “focused update ”will be phased out.
For additional information and policies on guidelinedevelopment, readers may consult the ACC/AHA guide-line methodology manual
4and other methodology arti-
cles.5-7
Selection of Writing Committee Members
The Joint Committee strives to ensure that the guide-
line writing committee contains requisite contentexpertise and is representa tive of the broader cardio-
vascular community by selection of experts across a
spectrum of backgrounds, representing differentgeographic regions, sexes, race s, ethnicities, intellectual
perspectives/biases, and clinical practice settings. Or-ganizations and professional societies with related in-
terests and expertise are invited to participate aspartners or collaborators.JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee227

Relationships With Industry and Other Entities
The ACC and AHA have rigorous policies and methods to
ensure that documents are developed without bias or
improper in ﬂuence. The complete policy on relationships
with industry and other entities ( RWI) can be found on-
line. Appendix 1 of the guideline lists writing committee
members ’relevant RWI. For the purposes of full trans-
parency, their comprehensive disclosure information is
available in a Supplemental Appendix . Comprehensive
disclosure information for the Joint Committee is alsoavailable online .
Evidence Review and Evidence Review Committees
In developing recommendati ons, the writing committee
uses evidence-based methodologies that are based on all
available data.
4,5Literature searches focus on randomized
controlled trials (RCTs) but also include registries, non-randomized comparative and descriptive studies, caseseries, cohort studies, systematic reviews, and expertopinion. Only key references are cited.
An independent evidence review committee is
commissioned when there are $1 question(s) deemed of
utmost clinical importance and merit formal systematic
review to determine which patients are most likely to
bene ﬁt from a drug, device, or treatment strategy, and to
what degree. Criteria for commissioning an evidence re-view committee and formal systematic review includeabsence of a current authoritative systematic review,feasibility of de ﬁning the bene ﬁt and risk in a time frame
consistent with the writing of a guideline, relevance to asubstantial number of patients, and likelihood that the
ﬁndings can be translated into actionable recommenda-
tions. Evidence review committee members may includemethodologists, epidemiologists, clinicians, and bio-statisticians. Recommendations developed by the writingcommittee on the basis of the systematic review aremarked
“SR”.
Guideline-Directed Medical Therapy
The term guideline-directe d medical therapy encom-
passes clinical evaluation, diagnostic testing, and bothpharmacological and procedural treatments. For theseand all recommended drug treatment regimens, the
reader should con ﬁrm dosage with product insert mate-
rial and evaluate for contrain dications and interactions.
Recommendations are limited to drugs, devices, andtreatments approved for clinical use in the United States.
Joshua A. Beckman, MD, MS, FACC, FAHA
Chair, AHA/ACC Joint Committee on
Clinical Practice Guidelines1. INTRODUCTION
1.1. Methodology and Evidence Review
The recommendations listed in this guideline are,
whenever possible, evidence based. An initial extensiveevidence review, which included literature derivedfrom research involving hum an subjects, published in
English, and indexed in MEDLINE (through PubMed),
EMBASE, the Cochrane Library, the Agency for HealthcareResearch and Quality, and other selected databasesrelevant to this guideline, was conducted from February2021 to April 2021. Search terms included both key wordsand index terms (eg, MeSH, Emtree); search termsincluded but were not limited to the following :a o r t i c
occlusion; aortic aneurysm; aortic aneurysm, thoracic;
aortic aneurysm, abdominal; surveillance after endovas-
cular aneurysm repair; diagnostic imaging; monitoring;surveillance; imaging; aorta; aortic; computed tomography;ultrasound; magnetic resonance imaging; arterial occlusivediseases; aortic diseases; aort ic atherosclerosis; athero-
sclerosis; clinical trial; observational study; randomizedcontrolled trial; review; ath erosclerotic aortic disease;
plaque, atherosclerotic; aorta ; aortitis; infectious; autoim-
mune; aortic rupture; penetrating aortic ulcers; compara-
tive studies; nonexperimental studies; type A aorticdissection; type A; type B; aneurysm, dissecting; aorta and
echocardiography. Theﬁnal evidence tables are included
in the Online Data Supplement and summarize the
evidence used by the writi ng committee to formulate
recommendations. References selected and publishedin the present document are representative and not
all-inclusive.
1.2. Organization of the Writing Committee
The writing committee consisted of clinicians, cardiol-
ogists, internists, interventionalists, surgeons, radiolo-gists, anesthesiologists, a nurse practitioner, and alay/patient representat ive. The writing committee
included representatives from the ACC, AHA, AmericanAssociation for Thoracic Su rgery, American College of
Radiology, Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists,Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and In-
terventions, Society of Thoracic Surgeons (STS), and
Society for Vascular Surgery (SVS). Appendix 1 of the
present document lists writing committee members ’
relevant RWI. For the purposes of full transparency,the writing committee members ’comprehensive
disclosure information is available in a Supplemental
Appendix .Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e228

1.3. Document Review and Approval
The Joint Committee appointed a peer review com-
mittee to review the document. The peer review
committee was comprised of individuals nominated by
ACC, AHA, and the collaborating organizations. Re-viewers ’RWI information was distributed to the
writing committee and is published in this document(Appendix 2 ).
This document was approved for publication by the
governing bodies of the ACC and the AHA and wasendorsed by the American A ssociation for Thoracic
Surgery, American College of Radiology, Society of
Cardiovascular Anesthesiolo gists, Society for Cardiovas-
cular Angiography and Interventions, Society of Inter-ventional Radiology, Society of Thoracic Surgeons,Society for Vascular Medici ne, and Society for Vascular
Surgery.1.4. Scope of the Guideline
In developing the “2022 ACC/AHA Guideline for the
Diagnosis and Management of Aortic Disease ”(2022 aortic
disease guideline), the writing committee reviewed pre-
viously published guidelines. Table 1 contains a list of
these publications deemed pertinent to this writing effortand is intended for use as a resource, thus obviating theneed to repeat existing guideline recommendations.
1.5. Class of Recommendations and Level of Evidence
The Class of Recommendation (COR) indicates the
strength of recommendation, encompassing the esti-mated magnitude and certainty of bene ﬁt in proportion to
risk. The Level of Evidence (LOE) rates the quality ofscienti ﬁc evidence supporting the intervention on the
basis of the type, quantity, and consistency of data fromclinical trials and other sources ( Table 2 ).
1TABLE 1 Associated Guidelines
Title OrganizationPublication Year
(Reference)
Guidelines
Thoracic endovascular aortic repair for descending thoracic aortic aneurysms SVS 20211
Valvular heart disease ACC/AHA 20202
Large vessel vasculitis EULAR 20203
Blood cholesterol AHA/ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/ADA/AGS/
APhA/ASPC/NLA/PCNA20194
Congenital heart disease AHA/ACC 20195
Abdominal aortic aneurysm SVS 20186
High blood pressure ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/ASPC/NMA/
PCNA20187
Lower extremity peripheral artery disease AHA/ACC 20178
Descending thoracic aorta diseases ESVS 20179
Bicuspid aortic valves statement of clari ﬁcation ACC/AHA 201610
Vascular graft infections, mycotic aneurysms, and endovascular infections AHA 201611
Endovascular repair of traumatic thoracic aortic injury SVS 201112
Thoracic aortic disease ACCF/AHA/AATS/ACR/ASA/SCA/SCAI/SIR/STS/SVM 201013
Coronary and other atherosclerotic vascular disease AHA/ACC 200614
Acute type A aortic dissection AATS 202115
Type B Aortic Dissection STS 202216
AACVPR indicates American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation; AAPA, American Academy of Physician Assistants; AATS, Ame rican Association for Thoracic
Surgery; ABC, Association of Black Cardiologists; ACC, American College of Cardiology; ACCF, American College of Cardiology Foundation; ACPM, Ame rican College of Preventive
Medicine; ACR, American College of Radiology; ADA, American Diabetes Association; AGS, American Geriatrics Society; AHA, American Heart Associat ion; APhA, American Pharmacists
Association; ASA, American Society of Anesthesiologists; ASH, American Society of Hematology; ASPC, American Society for Preventive Cardiology; ESVS, European Society for Vascular
Surgery; EULAR, European League Against Rheumatism; NLA, National Lipid Association; NMA, National Medical Association; PCNA, Preventive Cardio vascular Nurses Association; SCA,
Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists; SCAI, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions; SIR, Society of Interventional Ra diology; STS, Society of Thoracic Sur-
geons; SVM, Society for Vascular Medicine; and SVS, Society for Vascular Surgery.JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee229

1.6. AbbreviationsTABLE 2Applying American College of Cardiology/American Hear t Association Class of Recommendation and Level of Evidence
to Clinical Strategies, Interventions, Treatments, or Diagnostic Testing in Patient Care* (Updated May 2019)
Abbreviation Meaning/Phrase
3D 3-dimensional
AAA abdominal aortic aneurysmAAS acute aortic syndromeACEI angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitorAHI aortic height index
AR aortic regurgitation
ARB angiotensin receptor blockerASCA aberrant subclavian arteryASCVD atherosclerotic cardiovascular diseaseASI aortic size index
Continued on the next pageAbbreviation Meaning/Phrase
AVR aortic valve replacement
BAAI blunt traumatic abdominal aortic injury
BAV bicuspid aortic valveBP blood pressureBSA body surface areaBTAI blunt traumatic aortic injuryBTTAI blunt traumatic thoracic aortic injury
CMR cardiac magnetic resonance
CoA coarctation of the aortaCT computed tomographyCTA computed tomographic angiography
Continued on the next pageIsselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e230

2. NORMAL ANATOMY, ABNORMAL ANATOMY,
AND DEFINITIONS
2.1. Normal Aortic Anatomy
The aorta is the largest artery in the body and can be
divided into 5 main anatomic segments ( Figure 1 ): the root
or sinus segment, which extends from the aortic valveannulus to the sinotubular junction; the ascending
thoracic aorta, which extends from the sinotubularj u n c t i o nt ot h ei n n o m i n a t ea r t e r y ;t h ea o r t i ca r c h ,w h i c h
extends from the innominate to the left subclavian artery;the descending thoracic aorta, which extends from theleft subclavian artery to the diaphragm; and the abdom-inal aorta, which extends from the diaphragm to the level
of the aortic bifurcation.
T h ea o r t i cw a l li sc o m p o s e do f3l a y e r s( Figure 2 ): a thin
inner intima, a thicker central media, and a thin outeradventitia. The intima consists of a layer of endothelialcells within a matrix of connective tissue. The mediaconsists of smooth muscle cells, elastic ﬁbers, collagen
proteins, and polysacch arides sandwiched in >50 layers
known as elastic lamellae. The media provides strength
and distensibility to the aorta, features that are critical to
circulatory function. The adventitia is composed of con-nective tissue, ﬁbroblasts, nerves, and the vasa vasorum,
which perfuse the outer aortic wall and a substantialportion of the media.
2.2. Aortic Landing Zones
In addition to the standard anatomic descriptors of the
aortic anatomy, there is a more technical classi ﬁcation of
aortic anatomy that is used to plan, guide, and report
aortic interventions, especially endovascular stent-g r a f t i n g .B e c a u s et h ec l i n i c a ls u c c e s so ft h o r a c i ca o r t i cendovascular procedures is in ﬂuenced by the proximal
sealing zone, in this system the thoracic and abdominalaorta are divided into 11 landing zones, as detailed inFigure 3 .
Note that Roselli et al
2have proposed a modi ﬁcation of
zone 0, dividing it into 3 subsegments, in which 0A ex-
tends from the annulus to the distal margin of the highestcoronary, 0B extends above t he coronary to the distal
margin of the right pulmonary artery, and 0C extendsfrom the right pulmonary artery to the distal end of theorigin of the innominate artery.
2.3. De ﬁnitions of Dilation and Aneurysm of the Aortic Root
and Ascending Thoracic Aorta
The conventional de ﬁnition of an arterial aneurysm is any
artery that is dilated to at least 1.5 times its expectednormal diameter.
3This de ﬁnition applies well to the
abdominal and descending thoracic aorta. However, it haslong been recognized that this de ﬁnition fails when it
comes to de ﬁning aneurysms of the aortic root and
ascending thoracic aorta. For example, a man in his 40sw o u l db ee x p e c t e dt oh a v ea na verage aortic root diam-
eter of 3.5 cm; applying the standard de ﬁnition of $1.5
times reference diameter, his aortic root would have toreach 5.25 cm before it would be considered an aneurysm,whereas most experts would consider his aorta to be ananeurysm well below that diameter. Indeed, if this patienthad Marfan syndrome or a familial thoracic aorticAbbreviation Meaning/Phrase
DBP diastolic blood pressure
DMARD disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugECG electrocardiogramEVAR endovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repairFID focal intimal disruptionFDA U.S. Food and Drug Administration
FDG-PET ﬂuorodeoxyglucose –positron emission tomography
FEVAR fenestrated endovascular aortic repairGCA giant cell arteritisHRQOL health-related quality of lifeHTAD heritable thoracic aortic disease
ICU intensive care unit
IMH intramural hematomaIRAD International Registry of Acute Aortic DissectionLDL low-density lipoproteinLVV large vessel vasculitisMR magnetic resonance
MRA magnetic resonance angiography
MRI magnetic resonance imagingnsHTAD nonsyndromic heritable thoracic aortic diseasePAD peripheral artery diseasePAU penetrating atherosclerotic ulcer
PET positron emission tomography
rAAA ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysmRCT randomized controlled trialREBOA resuscitative endovascular balloon occlusion of the aortarEVAR endovascular repair for rAAA
SMA superior mesenteric artery
SBP systolic blood pressureSCI spinal cord injuryTAA thoracic aortic aneurysmTAAA thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysmTAAD thoracic aortic aneurysm and dissection
TAD thoracic aortic disease
TAR total arch replacementTEE transesophageal echocardiographyTEVAR thoracic endovascular aortic repairTTE transthoracic echocardiography
VSRR valve-sparing root replacementJACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee231

FIGURE 1 The Anatomy of the Aorta and Its Main Branches
Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e232

aneurysm, aortic repair would be recommended at a
diameter of #5.0 cm, a size that would not even be large
enough to be termed an “aneurysm. ”
The most important consideration in deciding the
diameter thresholds at which to call the root andascending aorta dilated or aneurysmal is based on thenatural history of such abno rmal aortas. Borger et al
4
studied 201 patients with bicuspid aortic valve (BAV)
undergoing aortic valve replacement (AVR) (those un-
dergoing concomitant replacement of the ascending aorta
were excluded) and followed them for 10 to 15 years; theyfound that those with baseline aortic diameters of 4.5 cmto 4.9 cm had a signi ﬁcantly increased risk of aneurysm,
dissection, or sudden death ( P<0.001) compared with
those with diameters <4.5 cm ( Figure 4 ).
To evaluate the risk of type A aortic dissection at
various diameters below the traditional 5.5 cm threshold
for prophylactic aortic r epair, Paruchuri et al
5plotted a
distribution curve of ascendi ng aortic size in a community
sample from the MESA (Multi-Ethnic Study of Athero-sclerosis) database. They then analyzed the number ofdissections (numerator) at each aortic diameter and thepopulation at risk at each aortic diameter (denominator).
They found that, relative to a control aortic diameter
of#3.4 cm, a diameter of 4.0 cm to 4.4 cm conferred an
89-fold increased risk of di ssection, and a diameter
of$4.5 cm conferred a 6,000-fold increased risk
(Figure 5 ), albeit these are only relative risk estimates and
do not inform absolute risk. It follows that the increase inrisk at 4.0 cm to 4.4 cm justi ﬁes de ﬁning an aorta of this
size “dilated, ”and the abrupt increase in risk at a diam-
eter of $4.5 cm justi ﬁes de ﬁning an aorta of this size as an
“aneurysm. ”Using this approach, of the subjects in the
MESA database, only 2.6% would be considered to have adilated aorta and only 0.2% to have an aneurysm.
This de ﬁnition of a dilated ascending aorta being $4.0
cm is consistent with what was proposed in the 2014European Society of Cardiology guidelines on the diag-nosis and treatment of aortic diseases, in which aortic
“dilation ”was similarly de ﬁned as an aorta diameter of
>4.0 cm.
6
Finally, in the clinical setting, the term “dilation ”is
preferred to “ectasia ”to describe mild aortic enlarge-
ment. Historically, there has been a lack of uniformity inFIGURE 2 AS i m p l i ﬁed Diagram Depicting the Key Histologic Components of the Aortic Wall
The medial layer in human aortas contains >50 alternating layers of elastin and smooth muscle cells (whereas only 5 are shown in this simpli ﬁed illustration).
Adapted (cropped) from "Illustration of tunics of the arteries vs veins" by Malgosia Wilk-Blaszczak, used under CC-BY 4.0 . "Illustration of tunics of the
arteries vs veins" is adapted (cropped) from ﬁgure 20.3 inBC OpenStax Anatomy and Physiology used under CC-BY 4.0 .JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee233

the use of “ectasia ”in image interpretation. Many radi-
ologists use “ectatic ”rather than “dilated ”to describe a
mildly enlarged aorta, whereas others use “ectatic ”to
describe an abnormal aortic shape, such as a “tortuous ”
aorta.7Even more problematic is the fact that some im-
aging groups use the term “ectasia ”to describe larger
a o r t a s ,s u c ha st h o s e4 . 5c mt o5 . 4c mi nd i a m e t e r ,8which
overlaps with what most experts would consider to be ananeurysm. Lastly, in imaging of the coronary arteries,“ectasia ”is typically used to describe diffuse (rather than
focal) coronary artery dilation,
9which may lead to some
clinical uncertainty when “ectasia ”is applied to the aorta.
2.3.1. Normalizing Aortic Root and Ascending Aortic Diameters
for Body Size
As with the aortic diameter thresholds for surgery pre-
sented in this guideline, it recognized that the 4.0 cm and
4.5 cm diameter thresholds discussed previously are
intended for those whose height, body surface area (BSA),or both is within 1 to 2 standard deviations of the mean.For male and female patients who are signi ﬁcantly shorter
or taller than average, these diameters need to beadjusted downward or upwa r d ,a c c o r d i n g l y .S e v e r a l
methods to normalize aortic diameter are currently usedin clinical practice an d clinical research.
The Z-Score
The z-score is routinely used to assess aortic dilation in
the pediatric population, as changes in a child ’sa g ea n d
body size make it especially challenging to de ﬁne normal
aortic size and to distinguish normal from pathologicaortic growth. Nomograms have been established corre-lating BSA and aortic root diameter to generate the z-score. One limitation of the reliance on BSA is that there
a r em u l t i p l ef o r m u l a et oc a l c u late BSA that yield different
results for the same patient. A second limitation is thatmultiple z-score calculators exist, each performingdifferently.
10F i n a l l y ,m o s to ft h el i t e r a t u r eo nt h en a t u r a l
history of acute aortic syndromes (AAS) is based on aorticdiameters, whereas reports of outcome based on z-scoresare limited, so the z-score is not typically used to reportthe degree of aortic dilation in adults.
The Aortic Size Index and Aortic Height Index
Most often, in the clinical care of adult patients, aortic
diameters are normalized usin g a ratio of aortic diameter
to BSA or aortic diameter to the patient ’s height. In 2006,
Davies et al
11showed that aortic size index (ASI), which is
deﬁned as aortic diameter (cm)/BSA(m2), is a better pre-
dictor of adverse aortic events than diameter alone, andthat a simple nomogram could be used to stratify those
with aortic aneurysms into low-, medium-, and high-risk
groups. However, it is unclear whether the weight of anadult has a signi ﬁcant impact on the expected normal
aortic diameter, and one would not expect a patient ’s
aorta to grow or shrink with signi ﬁcant ﬂuctuations in
weight. Zafar et al
12therefore examined whether aortic
height index (AHI), which is de ﬁned as aortic diameter
(cm)/patient height (m), might perform better than the
ASI, and they reported that the AHI performed at least as
well as the ASI12and had the advantage of being simpler
to calculate.
The Cross-Sectional Area to Height RatioAnother approach to normalizing aortic size to
height was proposed by Svensson et al in 2002
13inFIGURE 3 Classi ﬁcation of Aortic Anatomic Segments by
11 Landing Zones
Zone 0 (involves the ascending to distal end of the origin of the
innominate artery); Zone 1 (involves the origin of the left common
carotid; between the innominate and the left carotid); Zone 2 (in-volves the origin of the left subclavian; between the left carotid and
the left subclavian); Zone 3 (involves the proximal descending
thoracic aorta down to the T4 vertebral body; the ﬁrst 2 cm distal
to the left subclavian); Zone 4 (the end of zone 3 to the mid-descending aorta –T6); Zone 5 (the mid-descending aorta to the
celiac); Zone 6 (involves the origin of the celiac; the celiac to the
superior mesenteric); Zone 7 (involves the origin of the superiormesenteric artery; the superior mesenteric to the renals); Zone 8(involves the origin of the renal arteries; the renal to the infrarenal
abdominal aorta); Zone 9 (the infrarenal abdominal aorta to the
level of aortic bifurcation ); Zone 10 (the common iliac); Zone 11(involves the origin of the external iliac arteries). From Czerny et al.
1
Copyright 2019, with permission from Elsevier, Inc., Now Medical
Studios, and Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Association for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery.Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e234

which they calculated a ratio of the cross-sectional
area of the aorta (cm) to the patient ’sh e i g h t( m ) .
The initial studies used a cross-sectional area to
height ratio of >10 cm2/m as a threshold for inter-
vention because of a signi ﬁcant increase in risk ofadverse events; notably, in more contemporary re-
ports, this group has shown the simpler cross-sectionalarea to height ratio of $10 cm
2/m (rather than
>10 cm2/m) as the threshold pre dictive of increased
risk.14,15FIGURE 4 Freedom From Ascending Aortic Complications for Patients With Bicuspid Aortic Valve Disease
Patients with moderate dilation of the ascending aorta (4.5 cm –4.9 cm) had a signi ﬁcantly increased risk of future aortic complications (aneurysm, dissection,
or sudden death). Reprinted from Borger et al.4Copyright 2004, with permission from Elsevier, Inc. and the American Association for Thoracic Surgery.
FIGURE 5 Relative Risk of Aortic Dissection by Size Range
The relative risk of aortic dissection begins to increase appreciably at a diameter of 4.0 cm to 4.4 cm and then increases dramatically at a diameterof$4.5 cm. Reprinted from Paruchuri et al.
5Copyright 2005, with permission from Karger Publishers, Basel Switzerland.JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee235

2.4. De ﬁnitions and Classi ﬁcation of Acute Aortic Syndrome
(AAS)
AAS are life-threatening conditions in which there is a
breach in the integrity of the aortic wall. The most com-mon AAS are aortic dissection, intramural hematoma(IMH), and penetrating atherosclerotic ulcer (PAU), all ofwhich can lead to rupture ( Figure 6 ).
2.4.1. Aortic Dissection
Aortic dissection is the most common of the AAS. Aortic
dissection occurs when there is an intimal tear that allows
the blood to pass through the tear and into the aorticmedia, splitting the intima in 2 longitudinally, creating adissection ﬂap that divides the true lumen from a newly
formed false lumen ( Figure 6 ). The dissection ﬂap can
propagate in an antegrade or retrograde fashion and leadto a number of life-threatenin g complications, including
acute aortic regurgitation (AR), myocardial ischemia,
cardiac tamponade, acute st roke, or malperfusion syn-
dromes. The blood surging in the false lumen may ruptureback through the intima into the true lumen, creating a
reentry tear. If the blood in the false lumen instead tears
through the outer media and a dventitia, aortic rupture
will result. The incidence of aortic dissection is estimatedto be 5 to 30 cases per million people per year, with menmore commonly affected. Most dissections occur in thosebetween the ages of 50 to 70 years, although patients withMarfan syndrome, BAV, Loeys-Dietz syndrome, andvascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, present at youngerages.
2.4.1.1. De ﬁnition
Aortic dissection has traditionally been de ﬁned as “acute ”
during the ﬁrst 2 weeks after symptom onset and
“chronic ”when beyond the second week. Investigators
from the International Registry of Acute Aortic Dissection
(IRAD) proposed that aortic dissection be divided into 4
temporal types: hyperacute ( <24 h), acute (2 –7d ) ,s u b -
acute (8 –30 d), and chronic ( >30 d).2The most contem-
porary temporal classi ﬁcation system, proposed by theFIGURE 6 Acute Aortic Syndromes
In aortic dissection, a tear in the aortic intima allows blood to penetrate the aortic media, pushing the dissection ﬂap into the middle of the aorta, separating
the true from the false lumen. In intramural hematoma, blood leaks into the aortic media at low pressure, forming a thrombus that pushes the outer wall o f
the aorta outward, leaving a relatively normal appearing aortic lumen. A penetrating atherosclerotic ulcer allows blood to enter the aortic media, b ut
atherosclerotic scarring of the aorta typically con ﬁnes the blood collection, often resulting in a localized dissection or pseudoaneurysm. Adapted with
permission from Springer Nature Customer Service Centre GmbH: Springer Nature, Clough et al1Copyright 2015.Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e236

SVS and STS, similarly divides aortic dissection into 4
temporal types, as shown in Table 3 , to improve prog-
nostication and guide decision making about the timingand types of potential intervention.
Acute aortic dissection of the ascending aorta is
highly lethal in symptomatic patients left untreated,with an early mortality of 1% to 2% per hour after
symptom onset.
3The mortality rate is increased
among patients who present with or develop compli-cations of cardiac tamponade (with or withoutcardiogenic shock), acute myocardial ischemia or
infarction, stroke, or organ malperfusion.
3Patients
w i t hu n c o m p l i c a t e da c u t et y p eBa o r t i cd i s s e c t i o nhave a 30-day mortality rate of 10%. However, whenpatients with acute type B aortic dissection developcomplications, such as malperfusion or rupture, them o r t a l i t yr a t ei n c r e a s e st o2 0 %b yd a y2a n dt o2 5 %by day 30.
3
2.4.1.2. Classi ﬁcation
There are 2 commonly used anatomic classi ﬁcation sys-
tems for aortic dissection ( Figure 7 ): the DeBakey system
and the Stanford system.TABLE 3Classi ﬁcation of Aortic Dissection Chronicity
Based on the 2020 SVS/STS Reporting Standards
Chronicity Time From Onset of Symptoms
Hyperacute <24 h
Acute 1 –14 d
Subacute 15 –90 d
Chronic >90 d
Adapted with permission from Springer Nature Customer Service Centre GmbH:
Springer Nature, Clough RE, et al.1Copyright 2015.
STS indicates Society of Thoracic Surgeons; and SVS, Society for Vascular Surgery.
FIGURE 7 Classi ﬁcation of Acute Aortic Dissection
The DeBakey and Stanford classi ﬁcation systems are used most commonly. The DeBakey system offers greater anatomic detail, whereas the Stanford system
is simpler, essentially distinguishing those dissections that involve the ascending thoracic aorta from those that do not.JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee237

The DeBakey system categori zes dissections into types
I, II, and III, based on the origin of the intimal tear and theextent of the dissection:
nType I: Dissection tear originates in the ascendingaorta and propagates distally to include the aortic archand typically the descending aorta
nType II: Dissection tear is con ﬁned only to the
ascending aorta
nType III: Dissection tear orig inates in the descending
thoracic aorta and propagates most often distally
nType IIIa: Dissection tear is con ﬁned only to the
descending thoracic aorta
nType IIIb: Dissection tear originates in the descending
thoracic aorta and extends below the diaphragm
The Stanford classi ﬁcation system divides dissections
into 2 categories according to whether the ascending aortais involved or not, regardless of the site of origin:
nType A: All dissections involving the ascending aorta,
irrespective of the site of the intimal tear
nType B: All dissections that do not involve the
ascending aorta (including di ssections that involve the
aortic arch but spare the ascending aorta)
In 2019, the European Associ ation for Cardio-Thoracic
Surgery and the European Society for Vascular Surgerypublished an expert consensus document4for the treat-
ment of thoracic arch pathologies, in which they added athird category called “non-A-non-B dissection, ”to be
used for patients whose proximal dissection ﬂap begins in
the aortic arch.
Most recently, in 2020, the SVS and the STS proposed
an entirely new classi ﬁcation scheme that de ﬁnes the
aortic dissection anatomy in more granular detail
5:D i s -
sections are de ﬁned anatomically according to the loca-
tion of intimal tears and the proximal and distal extent ofthe dissection process ( Figure 8 ).
A
Dindicates type A is used for any dissection with
an entry tear in zone 0 and extends distally the zonedenoted by the subscript D (eg, A
9); B PD,t y p eBi su s e d
for any dissection with an entry tear in zone 1 or
beyond; the proximal and distal extents of the dissec-
tion are denoted by subscripts P and D, respectively(eg, B
39). ID, when a dissection begins in zone 0 but the
location of the entry tear has not been identi ﬁed, it will
be considered “Indeterminate ”;i tw i l lb ed e s i g n a t e d
with an I and its distal extent denoted by the subscriptD( e g ,I
9).
2.4.1.3. Malperfusion
Malperfusion syndrome occu rs when there is end-organ
ischemia related to inadequate perfusion of the aorticFIGURE 8 Anatomic Reporting of Aortic Dissection Based on the 2020 SVS/STS Reporting Standards
STS indicates Society of Thoracic Surgeons; and SVS, Society for Vascular Surgery. Reprinted from Lombardi et al.5Copyright 2020, with permission from
Elsevier, Inc., the Society of Thoracic Surgeons, and the Society for Vascular Surgery.Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e238

branch vessels. The relationship of the true and false lu-
mens in an aortic dissection has a critical role in main-taining stable perfusion of en d-organs. Initially, the true
lumen collapses because of the loss of transmural pres-sure across the dissection ﬂap and the subsequent elastic
recoil of the medial smooth muscle. Simultaneously, the
false lumen expands immediately because of reducedelastic recoil, depth of the dissection plane within themedia, and percentage of the wall circumferenceinvolved. Any of the aortic branches are at risk for mal-perfusion as the false lumen expands and compresses thet r u el u m e na n dc a no c c u ri nm u l t i p l ev a s c u l a rb e d ssimultaneously as the dissection propagates distally. Dy-
namic obstruction occurs when the septum of the
dissected intima prolapses across into the ostia of abranch, usually during systole, thereby not allowingadequate ﬂow to perfuse the vessel ( Figure 9 ). The ostia
itself remains anatomically undamaged. When thedissection tear extends into the vessel proper and createsa stenosis or thrombosis in the artery, static obstructionoccurs ( Figure 9 ).
2.4.2. Intramural Hematoma
IMH describes the presence of blood within the medial
layer of the aortic wall in the absence of an overt intimaltear or patent false lumen. The blood may arise fromeither rupture of the vasa vasorum causing bleedingwithin the media
7or small intimal tears that are not
visualized on standard imaging exams.8IMH is diagnosed
by computed tomographic angiography (CTA), magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI), and echocardiography by the
presence of a circular or crescent-shaped thickening ofthe aortic wall of >5 mm in the absence of detectable
blood ﬂow
9(Figure 6 ). Of patients presenting with sus-
pected AAS, studies suggest that 5% to 25% have IMH, aproportion that approaches 30% to 40% in the Asianliterature.
8-11
The natural history of IMH is variable. Fewer than 10%
of IMH cases resolve spontaneously, whereas 16% to 47%
progress to aortic dissection if the intimal layer rupturesand creates an entry tear.
7,12
2.4.3. Penetrating Atherosclerotic Ulcer
A PAU begins with an ulcerati on of an atherosclerotic
plaque, which leads to a focal disruption in the aorticintima that allows blood to penetrate into the medial layer
and is often associated with an IMH of variable size.
10
PAUs most often appear in the middle or distal descend-
ing thoracic aorta, less frequently in the aortic arch andabdominal aorta, and rarely in the ascending aorta.
8,10PAUs can vary in size, and often multiple PAUs are pre-
sent.10The true incidence is unknown but is estimated to
account for 2% to 7% of all cases of AAS.10Typically, pa-
tients with PAU are older ( >70 years of age) than those
w i t hc l a s s i ca o r t i cd i s s e c t i o n and present more often with
extensive and diffuse atherosclerotic disease involvingFIGURE 9 Mechanisms of Dynamic and Static Obstruction in Aortic
Dissection
(A)Static obstruction occurs when the dissection ﬂap extends from the
aortic lumen into the ostium of the affected branch vessel, leading tolocalized thrombosis of the branch false lumen that narrows or col-
ludes the branch true lumen and, consequently, impairs distal branch
perfusion. (B)Dynamic obstruction occurs when the false lumen be-
comes persistently pressurized and compresses the true lumen, in turn
pushing the dissection ﬂap up against the ostium of the affected
branch vessel, signi ﬁcantly reducing or occluding its ﬂow.(C)Some-
times, a branch vessel can suffer from both static and dynamicobstruction at the same time. Adapted with permission from Grewal
et al.
6Copyright 2021, Elsevier, Inc.JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee239

both the aorta and coronary arteries.10Additional com-
mon comorbidities include hypertension, tobacco use,chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and renal insuf-ﬁciency. PAU can occur in younger patients but often in
t h es e t t i n go fac o n n e c t i v et i s s u ed i s o r d e r ,a n dm e na r e
more commonly affected than women.
8
The natural history of PAU is not well de ﬁned, as
they can remain stable, enlarge, or progress to eitherIMH, dissection, pseudoaneurysm, or aortic rupture.
8
The risk of rupture has been reported to be up to40%.
13The optimal management strategy must be
individualized, considering the clinical presentation,
the imaging features of the PAU, and the patient ’s
comorbidities.2.5. Classi ﬁcation of Thoracoabdominal Aortic Aneurysm
(TAAA)
When descending thoracic aortic aneurysms (TAA)
extend into the abdominal aorta, they are referred to asthoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms (TAAA). The Craw-ford classi ﬁcation of TAAA, later modi ﬁed by Sa ﬁet al
1
(Figure 10 ), not only describes the extent of
an aneurysm but also may predict the morbidity andmortality associated with aneurysm repair.
2
2.6. Classi ﬁcation of Endoleaks
Endovascular stent-grafting is widely used in the repair of
aortic aneurysms. One of the li mitations of endograftingFIGURE 10 Classi ﬁcation of Thoracoabdominal Aortic Aneurysms
The classi ﬁcation of thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms according to extent of aortic involvement as originally proposed by Crawford is as follows3:Extent I,
below the left subclavian to above the celiac axis or opposite the superior mesenteric and above the renal arteries; Extent II, below the left subclavian and
including the infrarenal abdominal aorta to the level of the aortic bifurcation; Extent III, below T6 intercostal space, tapering to just above the infrarenal
abdominal aorta to the iliac bifurcation; and Extent IV, below T12, tapering to above the iliac bifurcation. Sa ﬁet al1proposed expanding the classi ﬁcation with
the addition of Extent V, below T6, tapering to just above the renal arteries.Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e240

i st h eo c c u r r e n c eo fe n d o l e a k s ,e i t h e re a r l yo rl a t e
following the procedure. There are 5 types of endoleaks,as detailed in Figure 11 . An endoleak results in the
persistence of blood ﬂow outside the graft and within theaneurysm sac, preventing its complete thrombosis.
Consequently, patients with endografts require lifelongsurveillance imaging to monitor for the appearance ofendoleaks.
1FIGURE 11 Classi ﬁcation of Endoleak Types
Endoleaks are classi ﬁed by 5 types: Type Ia, proximal attachment site endoleak; Type Ib, distal attachment site endoleak; Type II, backﬁlling of the aneurysm
sac through branch vessels of the aorta; Type III, graft defect or component misalignment; Type IV, leakage through the graft wall attributable to endograft
porosity; and Type V, caused by “endotension, ”possibly resulting from aortic pressure transmitted through the graft/thrombus to the aneurysm sac. Adapted
from Rokosh et al.2Copyright 2021, with permission from Elsevier, Inc., and the Society for Vascular Surgery.JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee241

3. IMAGING AND MEASUREMENTS
3.1. Aortic Imaging Techniques to Determine Presence and
Progression of Aortic Disease
Synopsis
Optimized depiction of aortic anatomy and pathology
requires dedicated aortic imaging protocols. Computed
tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI),transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) and trans-esophageal echocardiography (TEE), and abdominalaortic ultrasound all have important roles in these eval-uations ( Table 5 ). Selection of an imaging modality may be
based on patient-speci ﬁc factors, including hemodynamic
stability, contrast allergy, renal function, and patient
tolerance (eg, given relatively longer examination times
and the con ﬁned space associated with MRI, occasionally
requiring sedation). The inst itutional availability of an
imaging modality or an expert imaging physician may alsodirect modality selection. The ubiquity of CT scanners,combined with rapid acquisition of intuitive, high-
resolution 3-dimensional (3D) imaging data sets, has led
t ot h ew i d ea d o p t i o no ft h i sm o d a l i t yf o rt h ea s s e s s m e n t
of suspected aortic pathology and for periproceduralvascular evaluation, in most cases supplanting diagnosticcatheter angiography.
12
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Measurements should be obtained perpendicular to the
long axis of the aorta at speci ﬁed segmental locations
(Figure 12 ), with measurements also taken at the loca-
tions of any abnormalities. If a 3D data set has beenacquired, dedicated multiplanar reformats orthogonalto aortic ﬂow axis should be created at each level of
measurement. This approach provides structured,Recommendations for Aortic Imaging Techniques to Determine Presence and Progression of Aortic Disease
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In patients with known or suspected aortic disease, aortic diameters should be measured at reproducible
anatomic landmarks perpendicular to axis of blood ﬂow, and these measurement methods should be
reported in a clear and consistent manner. In cases of asymmetric or oval contour, the longest diameter
and its perpendicular diameter should be reported.3,4
1 C-LD2. In patients with known or suspected aortic diseas e, episodic and cumulative ionizing radiation doses
should be kept as low as feasible while maintaining diagnostic image quality.5-7
1 C-EO3. In patients with known or suspected aortic disease, when performing CT or MR imaging, it is recom-
mended that the root and ascending aortic diameters b e measured from inner-edge to inner-edge, using
an electrocardiographic-synchronized technique. If there are aortic wall abnormalities, such as athero-
sclerosis or discrete wall thickening (more common in the distal aorta), the outer-edge to outer-edge
diameter should be reported ( Table 4 ).
1 C-EO4. In patients with known or suspected aortic disease, the aortic root diameter should be recorded as
maximum sinus to sinus measurement. In the setti ng of known asymmetry, multiple measurements
should be reported, and both short- and long-axis i mages of the root should be obtained to avoid un-
derestimation of the diameter.
2a C-LD5. In patients with known or suspected aortic disease, it is reasonable that a dila ted root or ascending aorta
be indexed to patient height or BSA in the re port, to aid in clinical risk assessment.8-11
2a C-EO6. In patients with known or suspected aortic disease, when performing echocardiography, it is reasonable
to measure the aorta from leading-edge to leading-edge, perpendicular to the axis of blood ﬂow.
2b C-EOUsing inner-edge to inner-edge measurements ma y also be considered, particularly on short-axis
imaging.Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e242

repeatable measurement reporting on serial imaging
and avoids oblique imaging that may overestimate theaortic diameter at levels of greater curvature andtortuosity.
3,4
2. The cancer risk associated with CT scans remains a
controversial issue; however, the risk is generally
agreed to be greatest early in life and substantiallyattenuated later in life.
5,6Consideration of the indica-
tion for aortic imaging, optimization of the tube set-tings for CT protocols, and use of alternativemodalities such as MRI are all valid approaches tomitigate patient radiation exposure.
7
3. On CT and MRI, the root diameter can be measured
from the commissure to the opposite sinus, or from
sinus to sinus, which results in larger dimensions(Figure 12 ).
13Measuring from sinus to sinus and from
inner-edge to inner-edge on CT and MRI has showngood correlation with TTE for measurements of theroot and ascending segments,
14as well as improvedconﬁdence in the determination of aortic root margins
on MRI and lower interobserver and intraobservervariability.
15Measurement of graft material (eg, inter-
posed surgical or endostent) may likewise include aninner-edge to inner-edge measurement for determi-
nation of the functional lumen and potential use in
extension treatment planning. The use ofelectrocardiographic-gat ed images decreases motion
artifact and improves edge depiction in aortic rootimaging, with diminished measurement variability.
16If
there are aortic wall changes (eg, atherosclerosis,mural thrombus), as is more commonly noted in thea r c ha n dd i s t a la o r t a ,o rd i s c r e t ew a l lt h i c k e n i n g( e g ,
aortitis or IMH), the outer margins of the abnormal
segments are measured.
4. The shape of the aortic root can be asymmetric, and the
difference between the minimum (short-axis) andmaximum (long-axis) root diameters can be signi ﬁcant,
particularly in those with bicuspid valves.
17To avoidTABLE 4 Essential Elements of CT and MRI Aortic Imaging Reports
1. Maximum aortic diameter at each level of dilation, perpendicular to the axis of blood ﬂow. In cases of asymmetric or oval contour, the longest diameter and
its perpendicular diameter should be reported. Standard measurement levels may be included, even when normal.
2. Wall changes suggestive of atherosclerosis, dif fuse thickening (eg, aortitis), or mural thrombus.
3. Evidence of luminal stenosis /occlusion, including location, severity, and length.
4. Findings suggestive of acute aortic syndrome (eg, communicating dissec tion, intramural hematoma, penetrating atherosclerotic ulcer, focal in timal tear),
including proximal/distal extension ( Figure 7 ), suspected entry tear site (if visible ), and complications (eg, active contra st extravasation, rupture, contained
rupture, rupture including periaortic hemorrhage, pericardial and pleural ﬂuid, mediastinal stranding).
5. Extension of aortic disease process (acute or chronic) into branch vessels, ﬁndings suggestive of end-organ injury, and suspected malperfusion.
6. Direct comparison with previous examinations should be detailed to identify pertinent changes.
7. Presence and extent of repair (eg, interposition graft, endo vascular stent graft), as well as any evidence of complication.
8. Impression regarding disease classi ﬁcation (eg, acute aortic syndrome, aneurysm/pseudoaneur ysm, luminal stenosis, atherosclerotic aortic disease).
9. Relevant details regarding method of image acqui sition (eg, use of electrocardiographic-gating and phase of acquisition) and measurement (eg, a xial versus
double oblique, inner-edge versus outer-edge) should be included.
CT indicates computed tomography; and MRI, magnetic resonance imaging.
TABLE 5 Diagnostic Performance of Aortic Imaging Modalities
Parameter CT MRI TTE TEE US
Availability þþþ þþ þþþ þþ þþþ
Portability - - þþþ þþþ þþþ
Speed of acquisition þþþ þ þþ þþ þþ
Spatial resolution þþþ þþ þþ þþþ þþ
Temporal resolution þ þþ þþþ þþþ þþþ
Three-dimensional data set þþþ þþ þ þ þ
Arch branch vessel evaluation þþþ þþþ þþ þ NA
Evaluation of valve and ventricular function þ þþ þþþ þþþ NA
CT indicates computed tomography; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; NA, not applicable; TEE, transesophageal echocardiography; TTE, transthorac ic echocardiography; US,
abdominal aortic ultrasound; þþþ excellent results; þþgood results; þfair results; and -, not available.JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee243

underestimation, multiple measurements should be
reported, with either each of the sinus-to-sinus di-a m e t e r so rb o t hs h o r t -a n dl o n g - a x i sd i a m e t e r s ,t o
avoid underestimation of the true root size.
5. The cross-sectional aortic area to patient height ratio
has been shown to be associated with risk of aorticdissection and death in patients with tricuspid orbicuspid valves
9,10(see Section 2.3.1 ,“Normalizing
Aortic Root and Ascending Aortic Diameters for Body
Size ”), and both ASI and AHI have been shown to
predict risk of adverse events (rupture, dissection, or
death).116. There is a wealth of historical data regarding using TTE
to measure the aortic root (at end-diastole) from theleading-edge of the anterior wall to the leading-edge of
the posterior wall, identif ying the largest diameter.
18,19
These data led to the deter mination of normal limits
adjusted for age, sex, and body size20and provided
insight regarding the prevalence and prognosticimportance of aortic dilation. Additionally, measuringfrom leading-edge to leading-edge on TTE has showngood correlation with inner-edge to inner-edge mea-surements obtained on CT and MRI.
14The method of
inner-edge to inner-edge measurement on TTE imagesFIGURE 12 Aortic Imaging Techniques to Determine the Presence and Progression of Aortic Disease
(A)Schematic shows the leading-edge to leading-edge measurement technique used in echocardiography, from left to right: measurement of the aortic roo t
(sinuses of Valsalva), sinotubular junction, and proximal tubular ascending aorta. (B)Inner-wall to inner-wall measurements of the aortic root used in MRI
and CT. In addition, a consistent approach to measuring all 3 sinuses with MRI and CT is necessary. The sinus-to-commissure and sinus-to-sinus mea-
surements can both be used, but consistency is necessary for interval surveillance. (C)Standard measurement locations for MRI and CT with the inner-wall to
inner-wall technique. Adapted from Borger et al.21Copyright 2018, with permission from Elsevier, Inc. CT indicates computed tomography; and MRI,
magnetic resonance imaging. *Leading-edge to leading-edge. †Inner-wall to inner-wall.Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e244

may also be considered, with some experienced in-
vestigators showing excellent measurement
agreement.15
3.2. Conventions of Measurements
Reproducible and accurate measurements of the aorta are
critical for characterizing aortic disease and guidingtreatment decisions. Measurements should be obtainedperpendicular to the long axis of the aorta at speci ﬁed
segmental locations ( Figure 13 ),
1with measurements also
taken at the location of any abnormality. Unfortunately,
there is no widely accepted standard for aortic diametermeasurements (eg, inner-edge to inner-edge, outer-edgeto outer-edge) across imaging modalities. There is awealth of historical data regarding using TTE to measurethe aortic root (at end-diastole) from the leading-edge ofthe anterior wall to the leading-edge of the posterior wall,thus identifying the largest diameter.
2,3These data
allowed for the creation of normal limits adjusted for age,
sex, and body size4and provided insight regarding the
prevalence and prognostic importance of aortic dilation.
On CT and MRI, the root diameter can be measured
from the commissure to the opposite sinus, or from sinusto sinus, which results in larger dimensions ( Figure 13 ).
5
Measuring from sinus-to-sin us and from inner-edge to
inner-edge on CT and MRI has shown good correlation
with TTE for measurements of the root and ascending
segments,6as well as improved con ﬁdence in the delin-
eation of aortic root margins on MRI and lower interob-server and interobserver variability.
7Although aortic dilation as measured by diameter is a
well-known risk factor for the occurrence of aortic
dissection and rupture,8most dissections occur in aortas
with diameters that do not meet the threshold for pre-ventive surgery.
9This has led investigators to search for
better metrics for risk strati ﬁcation and treatment guid-
a n c e .F o ri n s t a n c e ,r e s e a r c hh a ss h o w nt h a ta s c e n d i n gaortic area indexed to height is associated with aorticdissection and adverse outcomes in patients withtricuspid or bicuspid valves.
10,11Male sex, age, height,
weight, and the presence of tra ditional cardiovascular risk
factors have also been found to correlate with increasedaortic size in large population-based studies.
12Aortic
length is known to increase over time; spurred by thisfact, and by the observation that intimal entry tears run ina transverse direction, researchers have found thatexcessive elongation of the ascending aorta may be pre-dictive of dissection and thus represents a potentially
relevant measurement.
13
Measurements of the arch and further distal segments
should also be performed perpendicular to the aortic axis,with care taken to avoid oblique imaging that may over-estimate the aortic diameter at levels of greater curvatureand tortuosity. In the setting of wall changes (eg, discretethickening from atherosclerosis, aortitis, IMH, or otherprocesses), the abnormal wall should be measured from
outer-edge to outer-edge. To assess abdominal aortic di-
mensions, ultrasonographic images may be obtained in adedicated examination or as part of a surfaceFIGURE 13 Reformatted CT Image Orthogonal to the Aorti c Root at the Level of the Sinuses of Valsalva
The root diameter can be measured from sinus-to-sinus (S-S) or sinus-to-commissure (S-C). The aortic root area (A) can also be measured. CT indicates
computed tomography; and ROI, region-of-interest.JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee245

echocardiographic examination. Several studies have
shown that the volume of an AAA may progress despite astable diameter.
14,15
3.2.1. Computed Tomography
CT can image the entire aorta and its branches with high
spatial resolution and fast acquisition. The use of
electrocardiographic-gated technique decreases motion
artifact of the root and ascending aorta,1signi ﬁcantly
increasing the precision of me asurements and diagnostic
conﬁdence. When necessary, CT can be performed
without the use of iodinated contrast, and such non-contrast imaging can still accurately provide diameterassessment of aortic aneurysms that can suf ﬁce for sur-
veillance of patients who cannot tolerate or cooperate
with MRI, although aortic wall delineation may be chal-
lenging in some instances (eg, at the aortic root level). Theuse of iodinated intravenous contrast allows for delinea-tion between aortic lumen and wall and generally im-proves assessment of wall changes. In some instances, thepotential concern of patient contrast allergy or renaltoxicity may be a consideration. However, according torecent consensus statements from the American College
of Radiology and the National Kidney Foundation,
2the
risk of acute kidney injury developing in patients withimpaired renal function after exposure to intravenousiodinated contrast media has likely been overestimatedgiven the dif ﬁculty distinguishing coincident from
contrast-induced nephropathy.
CT has a very high sensitivity and speci ﬁcity for acute
aortic syndromes (AAS, aort ic dissection, IMH, PAU)
3and
traumatic aortic injuries. Moreover, CT can identify
concomitant coronary involvement,4branch vessel
involvement, and hemopericardium, and may aid inidenti ﬁcation of dissection entry tears. In patients whose
CT is negative for AAS, the images may provide insightregarding other causes of th e presenting chest pain.
5
When imaging patients with a suspected AAS, a non-
contrast series of images is typically obtained ﬁrst, to
better distinguish IMH, if present, from other causes of
aortic wall thickening. Then, a series of arterial phasec o n t r a s t - e n h a n c e di m a g e si so b t a i n e dw i t ht h i ns l i c et oallow for reconstructions (computed tomographic angi-ography [CTA]), extending from the thoracic inlet to thel e v e lo ft h ef e m o r a la r t e r i e s ,t od e ﬁne the full extent of
any dissection and thereby guide therapy. For consis-tency in this document, CT is used to refer to computed
tomography modality broadly, with speci ﬁci m a g i n g
techniques chosen dependent on a given clinical indica-tion and patient history.
3.2.2. Magnetic Resonance Imaging
MRI provides coverage of the entire aorta and branch
vessels, can characterize aor tic wall changes in the settingof inﬂammation
1and AAS, and offers physiologic assess-
ment of ventricular and valve function plus ﬂow quanti-
ﬁcation. MRI uses no ionizing radiation and can often be
performed without intravenous contrast. MRI is thereforeoften a primary option for as sessing congenital aortic
abnormalities and is well-suited for serial imaging in
younger patients. The use of el ectrocardiographic-gated
imaging decreases motion artifact of the aortic root
2and
o f3 Dd a t a s e t s ,c r i t i c a lf o ra c h i e v i n gp r e c i s e ,r e p e a t a b l emeasurements.
3Limitations of MRI include spatial reso-
lution that, although good, is typically inferior to that ofC T ,a sw e l la st h ea p p e a r a n c eo fa r t i f a c t si np a t i e n t sw i t hindwelling metallic material or devices. Additionally, MRI
is not as widely available as CT for aortic imaging, has a
longer acquisition time, and the ability to monitor andtreat unstable patients in the scanner is limited. Thismodality is therefore less commonly used in patients withsuspected acute aortic pathology,
4especially when pa-
tients are unstable. Various M RI sequences are available
for aortic depiction, including magnetic resonance angi-ography (MRA), which involves volumetric acquisition of
aortic anatomy, with slice thickness allowing for recon-
s t r u c t i o no fi m a g e si nm u l t i p l ep l a n e s .I n t r a v e n o u sgadolinium-based contrast media are often used in MRA,although there is a very small risk of inducing nephro-genic systemic ﬁbrosis in patients with underlying kidney
disease, a risk that is particularly low with group II gad-olinium-based contrast agents.
5,6Additional sequences
are often used for aortic anatomic depiction that do not
require intravenous contrast media, such as cine gradient
echo bright blood and spin echo dark blood sequences.For consistency in this document, we use MRI to refer tothe modality of magnetic resonance imaging de ﬁned
broadly, which potentially includes many sequences thatare often combined in complementary manner within animaging protocol.
3.2.3. Echocardiography
Transthoracic Echocardiography (TTE)
TTE is the most common imaging modality used in
the initial nonemergency assessment of the thoracic
aorta.
1,2TTE is particularly useful in imaging the aortic
root and ascending aorta and in delineating aortic valveanatomy and function. Altho ugh not ideal for imaging
of the aortic arch, TTE often does visualize the aorticarch branch vessels and the proximal descending aortaand can aid in diagnosis of coarctation of the aorta(CoA) and patent ductus arteriosus. TTE is portable and
can be performed at the bedside with a high spatial and
temporal resolution. It can be useful in the evaluationof patients with AAS to detect complications, includingaortic valve regurgitation, left ventricular dysfunction,and cardiac tamponade. TTE is useful in the longitu-dinal surveillance of aortic root and ascendingIsselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e246

aortic dilation, provided those aortic segments are well
visualized.
Transesophageal Echocardiography (TEE)TEE provides high-resolution images of most of the
thoracic aorta, apart from a short segment of the distal
ascending aorta just proximal to the innominate artery,
attributable to acoustic shadowing from the trachea. TEEis also very useful in detailing aortic valve anatomy andfunction. TEE is particularly useful in the intraoperativeevaluation of patients with AAS in guiding both operativeand endovascular repair strategies and the assessment oftrue and false lumen ﬂows before and immediately after
aortic repair.
1,2
3.2.4. Intravascular Ultrasound
Intravascular ultrasound is an endovascular technology
designed to provide high-reso lution intraluminal imaging
of localized arterial and venous disease.1Intravascular
ultrasound is particularly useful in guiding the endovas-cular management of complex pathologies of the thoracicand abdominal aorta, because it reveals aortic size, tor-
tuosity, plaque burden, calci ﬁc a t i o n ,b r a n c hv e s s e lo s t i a ,
and intravascular ﬁlling defects (eg, thrombus, dissection
ﬂap), in addition to permitting landing zone assessment.
1
Such intravascular ultrasound imaging data may help to
identify patients for whom endovascular treatment ishigh-risk or contraindicated . Intravascular ultrasound is
especially useful in the setting of aortic dissection
2-4to
distinguish true and false lumen anatomy and thereby
guide endovascular or open repair. Intravascular ultra-
sound may be used to guide deployment of endovascularstents and, during ﬁnal assessment, to reduce the volume
of iodinated contrast used.
5Importantly, intravascularultrasound requires an operator who is familiar with both
the acquisition and interpretation of images.
3.2.5. Abdominal Ultrasound
Vascular ultrasound is an effective and rapid imaging
modality and is the recommended diagnostic tool inscreening for and surveillance of AAA.
1-3The ultrasonic
criterion for AAA is a diameter >3.0 cm, using primarily
the outer-edge to outer-edge measurement convention inthe anterior-posterior or transverse view.
4-6The sensi-
tivity of ultrasound to detect the presence of an aneurysmapproaches 100%,
7although interobserver variability ex-
ists, and successful imaging can be limited by obesity and
superimposed bowel gas.8
Using B-mode imaging, color Doppler, and spectral
waveform analysis, a compre hensive ultrasound evalua-
tion of the abdominal aorta can quickly detect other aorticpathologies, such as plaque or mobile atheroma forma-t i o n ,a r t e r i a ls t e n o s e s ,m u r a lt h r o m b u s ,i n ﬂammation,
dissection, pseudoaneurysm, contained rupture, and
aortocaval ﬁstulae, and these ﬁndings may prompt the
need for further imaging with CT or MRI. Abdominal ul-trasound can also be used for surveillance of patients whohave undergone endovascu lar repair of AAA (EVAR); it
can detect aneurysm sac expa nsion, which may indicate
t h ep r e s e n c eo fa ne n d o l e a k( Figure 11 ), de ﬁned as
abnormal ﬂow outside of the aortic endograft, a ﬁnding
that typically warrants con ﬁrmation by CT. The use of
contrast-enhanced color duplex ultrasound has shown
promising results in enhanced sensitivity in detection ofendoleaks,
9although its use requires ongoing study.
4. MULTIDISCIPLINARY AORTIC TEAMS
Recommendations for Multidisciplinary Aortic Teams
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 C-EO1. For patients with acute aortic disease that requi res urgent repair, a multi disciplinary team should
determine the most suitable intervention.
2a C-LD2. For patients who are asymptomatic with e xtensive aortic disease, or who may bene ﬁt from complex open
and endovascular aortic repairs, or with multiple c omorbidities for whom intervention is considered,
referral to a high-volume center (performing at least 3 0-40 aortic procedures annually) with experienced
surgeons in a Multidisciplinary Aortic Team is reasonable to optimize treatment outcomes.1-6
Synopsis
Evidence-based standards for medical and surgical con-
ditions recognize the critical relationship among bothhospital and surgeon case volumes and patient outcomes.Clinical excellence is furthe r enhanced by collaborative,
multispecialty teams to foster the best treatment of pa-
tients, especially for complex presentations with multi-organ threats. Although there is no agreed on de ﬁnition of a
Multidisciplinary Aortic Team, an appropriate frameworkmight be: A specialized hospital team with an exceptionallyhigh concentration of expertise in the evaluation and
management of aortic disease, in which care is delivered ina comprehensive, multidisciplinary manner.
7The concept
of comprehensive heart valve centers was formally codi ﬁed
in the “2020 ACC/AHA Guideline fo rt h eM a n a g e m e n to ft h e
Patient With Valvular Heart Disease, ”8which emphasized
the numerous essential components of such centers,ranging from physician expert ise, experience, and tech-
nical skill to data collection, research, and education, toinstitutional facilities and resources. Although the speci ﬁcJACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee247

components of such teams may differ from center to cen-
ter, the most common features that distinguish Multidis-ciplinary Aortic Teams includ e: Having cardiac surgical,
vascular surgical, and endovascular specialists with
extensive experience managing complex aortic disease at a
center with a high volume of aortic interventions; havingimaging specialists with expertise in aortic disease toperform and interpret CT, MRI, and echocardiography;anesthesiologists experienced in the management of acuteaortic disease and cerebrospinal ﬂu i dd r a i n a g e ;a n da n
intensive care unit (ICU) experienced in the managementof acute aortic disease.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. In cardiovascular care, we have long recognized the
critical value of collaborative multidisciplinary exper-tise in cardiac transplantation and mechanical circula-tory support conducted only at centers of excellence.More recently, we have seen the rise in multidisciplinary
heart teams focused on the care of patients with com-plex coronary artery disease and patients with complexheart valve disease; indeed, the important role of
multidisciplinary heart valve teams was emphasized in
the “2 0 2 0A C C / A H AG u i d e l i n ef o rt h eM a n a g e m e n to f
the Patient With Valvular Heart Disease. ”
8There is
ample evidence that patients with complex aortic dis-ease may similarly bene ﬁt from treatment by such
multidisciplinary teams.
6Andersen et al1compared the
outcomes of patients with acute type A aortic dissectionundergoing open surgical repair before and after
implementation of a multidisciplinary thoracic aortic
surgery program and found that operative mortalitydeclined dramatically af ter implementation of the
multidisciplinary team and that the signi ﬁcant mortality
advantage persisted over a 5-year follow-up ( P¼0.002).
Likewise, in a report from England,
2hospitals withFIGURE 14 Observed Relationship Between Annual Institutional Case V olume and Risk-Adjusted Odds Ratio for Operative Mortality /C62 Standard
Deviations as Assessed With Regression Analysis
The odds ratio for operative mortality decreased as institutional case volume increased. Adapted from Hughes et al.4Copyright 2013, with permission from
Elsevier Inc.Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e248

multidisciplinary thoracic aortic programs reported
signi ﬁcant reductions in mortality compared with hos-
pitals without such programs.
2. In a study of 230,736 Medicare bene ﬁciaries undergo-
ing AAA repair between 2001 and 2006, in which hos-pital procedural volume for both open andendovascular repair was divided into quintiles, theadjusted mortality decreased as hospital volume
increased, by quintile, especially among the group
undergoing open surgical repair.
3The bene ﬁts of high
case volume on surgical outcome apply similarly topatients with TAA. Hughes et al
4analyzed >13,000
elective aortic root and aortic valve-ascending aorticprocedures performed at 741 North American hospitalsfrom 2004 to 2007. They found a negative associationbetween the hospital volume and the adjusted odds
ratio (OR) for mortality ( P<0.001), particularly at a
hospital volume of <30 to 40 procedures annually
(Figure 14 ). The inverse relationship between center
case volume and mortality was shown again in a morecontemporary series by Mori et al
9of>53,000 proximal
thoracic aortic surgeries in the United States from 2011to 2016 in which the risk of operative mortalitydecreased signi ﬁcantly when the annual center volume
exceeded 20 to 25 cases (only 116 U.S. centers per-
formed >20 cases/y), and decreased signi ﬁcantly
further still at an annual center volume of >50 cases
(only 24 U.S. centers performed >50 cases/y)
(Figure 15 ). Perhaps the most consistent correlation
between case volume and mortality rate is amongpatients with acute aortic dissection. In a retrospective
review of 232 patients with acute type A aortic dissec-tion who underwent urgent surgery in a single center inthe United Kingdom, the 30-day mortality rate wassigni ﬁcantly lower among those operated on by a sur-
geon with aortic expertise versus a nonaortic expert, at10% versus 26%, respectively ( P¼0.02). Moreover,
aortic specialists performed aortic root procedures
signi ﬁcantly more often (43.0% versus 17.3%;
P¼0.001), and their cross-clamp times were signi ﬁ-
cantly shorter.
5Finally, Umana-Pizano et al10found
that the mortality rate of acute type A aortic dissectionrepair was 14% versus 24% for high-volume and low-volume surgeons, respectively. Clearly not all patientswith thoracic aortic disease (TAD) can be treated byMultidisciplinary Aortic Teams, especially in the
setting of AAS. Nevertheless, when patients are
referred for elective aortic intervention, especially ataortic diameter thresholds that are borderline, thelower surgical mortality rate with expert aortic sur-geons at high-volume centers may justify early aorticrepair. Similarly, when aortic procedures are relativelynew or complex, the best outcomes are likely to be atcenters with high-volume operators who have experi-
ence with such novel techniques. Consequently,
throughout this guideline is a number of recommen-dations in which it is speci ﬁed that certain open sur-
gical or endovascular aortic repairs be performed byexperienced operators in centers with Multidisci-plinary Aortic Teams.FIGURE 15 Predicted Risk of Mortality Derived From the Logistic Re gression Model Without Center Case Volume as a Covariate
Actual mortality and the ratio of actual mortality to predicted mortality (A/P ratio, the risk-adjusted mortality rate) are also shown. A similar pre dicted risk of
mortality across the case volume strata and a decrease in the actual mortality at higher center case volume are seen. Reprinted from Mori et al.9Copyright 2018,
with permission from Elsevier Inc.JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee249

5. SHARED DECISION-MAKING
Synopsis
Shared decision-making is increasingly used in patient-
centered care as advocated by the National Academy ofMedicine.
7Although no randomized trials have evaluated
the value and effectiveness of shared decision-making,
multiple position papers advocate strongly for the incor-poration of shared decision-making in the care of patientswith thoracic and AAAs.
2-5Decision aids have been
developed for shared decision-making in patients withAAAs to help improve the patient understanding of thedisease and treatment options.
1Shared decision-making
is especially useful when considering the diameter
thresholds for and the timing of intervention in addition
to having an important role in considering the risks ofpregnancy in patients with u nderlying aortic disease.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Shared decision-making is an active process in which
patients and families are encouraged to share their
values and preferences regarding quality of life, goals
of care, and desired procedural outcomes. Formallyrecognizing those preferences helps physicians to bet-ter frame the risks and bene ﬁts of intervention versus
conservative management. Actively involving patientsin the decision-making process is especially importantin situations in which there is clinical equipoise, suchas: an aortic aneurysm with a diameter at the border-
line of the threshold for repair; performing valve-
sparing root repair rather than valved-conduit aorticroot replacement; performing thoracic endovascularaortic repair (TEVAR) in a patient with an uncompli-cated type B aortic dissection who is at increased risk ofcomplications; or treating an AAA with open surgicalversus endovascular repair. Shared decision-makingmay be used for noninterventional issues as well,
such as the choice of medical therapies or the imaging
modality used for surveillance.
2. Shared decision-making has an important role in
pregnancy among those with aortic disease to deter-mine whether to consider conception, an appropriatediameter threshold for prophylactic aortic repair, and
the mode of delivery. This has particular relevance inpatients with Marfan syndrome and Loeys-Dietz syn-drome, and other heritable aortic disorders who are
planning a pregnancy.
6. ANEURYSMS
6.1. Thoracic Aortic Aneurysm (TAA) Causes
TAAs occur in 5 to 10 per 100,000 person years.1The
natural history and treatment vary depending on thec a u s ea n dl o c a t i o no ft h eT A A .T h es i z eo fag i v e ns e g m e n tof the thoracic aorta is in ﬂuenced by age, sex, height, and
body size.
2Aortic z-scores and other diameter indexing
methods (see Section 2.3 ,“Deﬁnitions of Dilation and
Aneurysm of the Aortic Root and Ascending ThoracicAorta ”) may assist with risk assessment.
3Of all TAA, an-
eurysms of the aortic root, ascending aorta, or both are
most common ( w60%), followed by those of the
descending aorta ( w30%) and arch ( <10%). Hypertension,
smoking, hypercholesterolemia, and heritable geneticvariants are risk factors for TAA disease. Patients withTAA have a modestly increased incidence of AAA
4and
cerebral aneurysms.5
Causes of TAA include heritable disorders, congenital
conditions, multifactorial d egenerative conditions, pre-
vious aortic dissection, in ﬂammatory diseases, and in-
fectious diseases ( Table 6 ). Aneurysms of the aortic root
and ascending thoracic aorta tend to have a heritable in-ﬂuence and present at younger ages, whereas aneurysms
of the descending thoracic aorta tend to be degenerativeand present at older ages.
6Moreover, aneurysms of the
aortic root and ascending thoracic aorta are also
commonly associated with BAV, although the genetic
basis of BAV and why some but not all patients have aconcomitant aortopathy are not well understood. Finally,many aneurysms of the root and ascending thoracic aortaare sporadic and idiopathic. Because the management ofpatients with aneurysms of the aortic root and ascendingRecommendations for Shared Decision-Making
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 C-LD1. In patients with aortic disease, shared decision -making is recommended when determining the appro-
priate thresholds for intervention, deciding on the type of surgical repair, choosing between open surgical
versus endovascular approaches; and in medical management and surveillance.1-6
1 C-EO2. In patients with aortic disease who are contemplat ing pregnancy or who are pregnant, shared decision-
making is recommended when considering the cardiova scular risks of pregnancy, the diameter thresholds
for prophylactic aortic surgery, and the mode of delivery.Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e250

TABLE 6 Cause of TAA
HTAD (see Table 7 ): syndromic
nMarfan syndrome
nLoeys-Dietz syndrome
nVascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
nSmooth muscle dysfunction syndrome
nOthers: attributable to pathogenic variants in FLNA ,BGN ,LOX
HTAD (see Table 7 ): nonsyndromic
nACTA2 ,MYH11 ,PRKG1 ,MYLK , and others
nFamilial thoracic aortic aneurysm without identi ﬁed pathogenic variants in a known gene for HTAD
Congenital conditions
nBicuspid aortic valve
nTurner syndrome
nCoarctation of the aorta
nComplex congenital heart defects (tetralogy of Fallot, t ransposition of the great vessels, truncus arteriosus)
HypertensionAtherosclerosis
Degenerative
Previous aortic dissectionInﬂammatory aortitis
nGiant cell arteritis
nTakayasu arteritis
nBehçet disease
nImmunoglobulin G4-related disease, antineutrop hil cytoplasmic antibody-related, sarcoidosis
Infectious aortitis
nBacterial, fungal, syphilitic
Previous traumatic aortic injury
HTAD indicates heritable thoracic aortic diseases; and TAA, thoracic aortic aneurysms.
FIGURE 16 Recommendations for Management of Aneurysms of the Aortic Root and Ascending Aorta According to Known Causative Factors.
JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee251

thoracic aorta may differ depending on the underlying
cause or family history, the recommendations for medical
and surgical therapy are g rouped accordingly in the
document, as shown in Figure 16 .
Approximately 20% of TAA are related to a genetic or
heritable condition (also referred to as heritable thoracica o r t i cd i s e a s e[ H T A D ] ) ,s o m eo fw h i c ha s s o c i a t ew i t hmultisystem features (considered syndromic HTAD) andothers with abnormalities limited to the aorta with orwithout its branches (known as nonsyndromic HTAD)
7
(Table 7 ). HTAD most commonly involves the aortic root,
ascending aorta, or both but may also present with distalaortic disease and aortic dissection.8Pathogenic variants
in multiple genes can lead to TAA, cerebral aneurysms,
and AAA.7,8Up to 20% of individuals with a TAA or aortic
dissection have a family history of TAD, with at least 1affected ﬁrst-degree relative.
8Population studies have
shown the familial nature of TAAs and dissections, withfamilial cases having a signi ﬁcantly increased risk of TAA
and aortic dissection
8,9compared with sporadic cases.
Therefore, among patients with aortic root and ascendingaortic aneurysm or those with a ortic dissection, screening
ofﬁrst-degree relatives with imaging is essential to detect
unrecognized, asymptomatic TAD.
8,10TABLE 7 TAA Syndromes and Conditions Attributable to a Heritable or Genetic Cause
Condition Gene Clinical Features
Syndromic HTAD*Marfan syndrome FBN1 Aortic root aneurysm, aortic dissection, TAA, MVP, long bone overgrowth, arachnodactyly,
dolichostenomelia, scoliosis, pectus deformities, ectopia lentis, myopia, tall stature, pneumothorax,
dural ectasia
Loeys-Dietz syndrome TGFBR1, TGFBR2, SMAD3, †
TGFB2, TGFB3TAA, branch vessel aneurysms, aortic dissection, arterial tortuosity, MVP, craniosynostosis, hypertelorism,
bluish sclera, bi ﬁd/broad uvula, translucent skin, visible veins, club feet, dural ectasia, and premature
osteoarthritis and peripheral neuropathy †
Vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome COL3A1 TAA, AAA, arterial rupture, aortic dissection, MVP, bowel and uterine rupture, pneumothorax, translucent
skin, atrophic scars, small joint hypermobility, easy bruising, carotid-cavernous ﬁstula
Arterial tortuosity syndrome SLC2A10 Tortuous large and medium sized arteries, aortic dilation, craniofacial, skin and skeletal features
Shprintzen-Goldberg syndrome SKI Craniosynostosis, skeletal features, aortic dilation
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome with
periventricular nodular heterotopiaFLNA X-linked, periventricular nodular heterotopia, TAA, BAV, MV disease, PDA, VSD, seizures, joint
hypermobility
Meester-Loeys syndrome BGN X-linked, TAA, aortic dissection, MV disease
LOX-related TAA LOX TAA, BAV, aortic dissection, Marfanoid habitus in some
Smooth muscle dysfunction syndrome ACTA2 TAA, moyamoya-like cerebrovascular disease, pulmonary hypertension, pulmonary disease,
hypoperistalsis, hypotonic bladder, congenital mydriasis
11
Nonsyndromic HTAD (Familial TAA)
FTAA ACTA2 TAA, aortic dissection, premature CAD and moyamoya-like cerebrovascular disease, livedo reticularis, iris
ﬂocculi
FTAA MYH11 TAA, aortic dissection, PDA
FTAA MYLK Aortic dissection at relatively small aortic size
FTAA PRKG1 Aortic dissection at young ages at small aortic sizes
FTAA MAT2A TAA, aortic dissection, BAV
FTAA MFAP5 TAA, aortic dissection, skeletal features may be present
FTAA FOXE3 TAA, aortic dissection
FTAA THSD4 TAA, aortic dissection
Bicuspid Aortic Valve –Associated Ascending Aortic Aneurysm
Familial BAV/AS and TAA NOTCH1 Aortic valve stenosis, TAA
BAV with TAA TGFBR2, MAT2A, GATA5,
SMAD6, LOX, ROBO4, TBX20Syndromic and nonsyndromic HTAD and FTAA with an increased frequency of BAV
Turner syndrome XO, Xp BAV, CoA, TAA, aortic dissection, short stature, lymphedema, webbed neck, premature ovarian failure
*Some individuals with pathogenic variants in a gene that can lead to syndromic HTAD have very few or no syndromic features, and variants in some genes c ausing syndromic HTAD may also lead
to nonsyndromic HTAD.†SMAD3 premature osteoarthritis and peripheral neuropathy.
AAA indicates abdominal aortic aneurysm; AS, aortic stenosis; BAV, bicuspid aortic valve; CAD, coronary artery disease; CoA, coarctation of the aor ta; EDS, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome; FTAA,
familial thoracic aortic aneurysm (and dissection) syndrome; HTAD, heritable thoracic aortic disease; MV, mitral valve; MVP, mitral valve prolaps e; PDA, patent ductus arteriosus; TAA, thoracic
aortic aneurysm; and VSD, ventricular septal defect.Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e252

6.1.1. Sporadic and Degenerative TAA
Although there is a well-recognized anatomic distinction
between aneurysms of the thoracic versus abdominal
aorta, this should not imply that all TAA are similar in
cause or natural history. Aneurysms of the aortic root andascending aorta are typically diagnosed at younger pa-tient ages than aneurysms of the descending thoracicaorta (60 versus 72 years, respectively).
1Even when
considering just the “sporadic ”aneurysms (ie, aneurysms
in which there is no evidence of a syndromic, familial, orknown genetic etiology), a signi ﬁcant difference in the
ages between the 2 groups (64 versus 72 years, respec-
tively) persists.
1In addition, typical atherosclerosis risk
factors (ie, hypertension, diabetes, smoking) are signi ﬁ-
cantly less common in sporadic root and ascending versusdescending aortic aneurysms.
2Moreover, the prevalence
of aortic calci ﬁcation or atheroma (by CT or MRI) is quite
low in sporadic aneurysms of the root and ascendingthoracic aorta but quite high in aneurysms of thedescending aorta, at 8% to 9% versus 80% to 88%,
respectively.
1Collectively, these ﬁndings suggest that
aneurysms of the aortic root and ascending aortic tend tohave a congenital if not hereditary cause, whereas aneu-rysms of the descending aorta tend to have an athero-
sclerotic cause. Although sometimes referred to as
atherosclerotic aneurysms, more often aneurysms ofdescending thoracic aorta (not related to connective tis-sue disorders) are referred to as “degenerative. ”The
medical management and surgical and endovascularmanagement of sporadic and degenerative aneurysms arediscussed in Sections 6.4 ,“Medical Management of Spo-
radic and Degenerative Aortic Aneurysm Disease, ”and
6.5,“Surgical and Endovascular Management of Aortic
Aneurysms, ”respectively.
6.1.2. Genetic Aortopathies
6.1.2.1. HTAD: Genetic Testing and Screening of
Family Members for TAD
Recommendations for HTAD: Genetic Testing and Screening of Family Members for TAD
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In patients with aortic root/ascending aortic aneurysm s or aortic dissection, obtaining a multigenerational
family history of TAD, unexplained sudden deaths, a nd peripheral and intracranial aneurysms is recom-
mended.1-3
1 B-NR2. In patients with aortic root/ascending aortic aneu rysms or aortic dissection and risk factors for HTAD
(Table 8 ,Figure 17 ), genetic testing to identify pathogenic/lik ely pathogenic variants (ie, mutations) is
recommended.4-6
1 B-NR3. In patients with an established pat hogenic or likely pathogenic variant in a gene predisposing to HTAD, it
is recommended that genetic counseling be provided and the patient ’s clinical management be informed
by the speci ﬁc gene and variant in the gene.7-9
1 B-NR4. In patients with TAD who have a pathogenic/likely p athogenic variant, genetic testing of at-risk bio-
logical relatives (ie, cascade testing) is recommended.6,10,11In family members who are found by genetic
screening to have inherited the pathogenic/likely pat hogenic variant, aortic imaging with TTE (if aortic
root and ascending aorta are adequately visual ized, otherwise with CT or MRI) is recommended.4,5,12
1 B-NR5. In a family with aortic root/ascending aortic aneurysm s or aortic dissection, if the disease-causing variant
is not identi ﬁed with genetic testing, screening aortic i maging (as per recommendation 4) of at-risk
biological relatives (ie, cascade testing) is recommended.13-15
1 C-LD6. In patients with aortic root/ascending aortic aneurysms or aortic dissection, in the absence of either a
known family history of TAD or pathogenic/likely pat hogenic variant, screening aortic imaging (as per
recommendation 4) of ﬁrst-degree relatives is recommended.13
1 C-EO7. In patients with acute type A aortic dissection, the d iameter of the aortic root and ascending aorta should
be recorded in the operative note and medical recor d to inform the management of affected relatives.JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee253

Synopsis
A major risk factor for aortic root aneurysms, ascending
aortic aneurysms, and aortic dissection is a pathogenicvariant in genes predisposing to TAD. Although the rec-ommendations focus on individuals at high risk for asingle gene mutation ( Table 8 ), genetic testing may have a
role in many TAD patients. A multigene panel comprisingall genes suspected to cause HTAD is the most cost-effective and clinically useful approach to testing. Only
pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants are disease-
causing and should be used for cascade genetic testingall relatives at risk for inheriting the disease-causingvariant.
15,16
In families with HTAD in which the causative gene has
not been identi ﬁed, the clinical features in affected family
member should dictate management of other familymembers, including location of aneurysms; relevant
clinical features include the diameter of the aortic root
and ascending aorta in affected family members who havehad a type A dissection (noting that the aortic root typi-cally is not distorted by the dissection, whereas theascending aorta may acutely enlarge
17)a n do t h e rv a s c u l a r
disease or features segregating with TAA in the family.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Current data indicate that 13% to 20% of patients with
TAD and without Marfan syndrome or Loeys-Dietzsyndrome features have similarly affected ﬁrst-degree
relatives.
1,2TAD in these families is typically inheri-
ted in an autosomal dominant manner, with decreasedpenetrance, particularly in women. These data suggestthat heterozygous pathogen ic variants in single genes
are responsible for HTAD in most families.
3,18In fam-
ilies with HTAD, testing in an individual diagnosedwith TAD should be initiated. Patients with a familyhistory of the disease present at younger ages (average
57 years).
3These families with HTAD show variable
expression of TAD, including varying age of diseaseonset, frequency of aortic dissection at a diameter <5.0
cm, risk for type B aortic dissection, and frequencywith which dilation involves the aortic root, thetubular ascending aorta, or both.
8,14In addition, the
speci ﬁc altered gene impacts the risk for associated
vascular conditions.2. The HTAD genetic testing panels include (at the time of
this writing) 11 genes that are con ﬁrmed to confer a
highly penetrant risk for TAD: FBN1 ,LOX,COL3A1,
TGFBR1 ,T G F B R 2 ,S M A D 3 ,T G F B 2 ,A C T A 2 ,MYH11 ,
MYLK ,a n d PRKG1.19These panels also include genes
that increase the risk for TAD and/or lead to systemic
features that overlap with Marfan syndrome, Loeys-Dietz syndrome, or vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.Clinical genetic testing is integral to the diagnosticevaluation of patients with TAD who have clinical in-dicators suggestive of an un derlying single gene dis-
order ( Table 8 ).
5,20In patients who meet the clinical
diagnostic criteria for Marfan syndrome but do not
have ectopia lentis (ie, dislocated lens), genetic testing
is reasonable to exclude an alternative diagnosis ofLoeys-Dietz syndrome. Genetic testing laboratoriescategorize rare variants in HTAD genes into theseclasses: pathogenic, likely pathogenic, variant of un-certain/unknown signi ﬁcance, benign, and likely
benign. Variants of unknown signi ﬁcance have not
been con ﬁrmed to cause TAD and therefore should not
be used either to identify which family members are at
risk or to guide clinical management. Because a subsetof these variants of unknown signi ﬁcance may,
nevertheless, be disease-causing, families with thepotential to help further classify the variant of un-known signi ﬁcance should be evaluated in collabora-
tion with the genetic testing company.
3.FBN1 ,TGFBR1 ,TGFBR2, SMAD3, and TGFB2 mutations
have been identi ﬁe di na p p r o x i m a t e l y6 %t o8 %o f
HTAD families whose members do not have syndromicfeatures of Marfan syndro me or Loeys-Dietz syn-
drome.
12,20-23Mutations in ACTA2 ,MYH11 ,MYLK ,LOX,
and PRKG1 have been con ﬁrmed to cause HTAD in the
absence of signi ﬁcant features of Marfan syndrome or
Loeys-Dietz syndrome.16,24Through clinical charac-
terization of HTAD families with pathogenic variants in
novel genes, data have emerged that the underlying
gene predicts not only who in the family is at risk forthoracic aortic aneurysm and dissection (TAAD) butalso the aortic disease presentation, risk for aorticdissection at a given range of aortic diameters asdescribed previously, and risk for and type of addi-tional vascular diseases.
7-9For example, TGFBR2 mu-
tations predispose to TAAD but also to intracranial
aneurysms and aneurysms and dissections of other
arteries, whereas ACTA2 mutations lead to TAAD and
occlusive vascular disease, including early onset strokeand coronary artery disease. Genetic counseling isuseful to explain to patients and families the geneticrisk and how it is inherited, to assess the family historyto determine TAD risk, to assist in cascade genetictesting and/or imaging for TAD in family members, and
to offer psychosocial and ethical guidance.
10TABLE 8 Risk Factors for Familial TAD
TAD and syndromic features of Marfan syndrome, Loeys-Dietz syndrome, or
vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
TAD presenting at age <60 y
A family history of either TAD or peripheral/intracranial aneurysms in a ﬁrst- or
second-degree relative
A history of unexplained sudden death at a relatively young age in a ﬁrst- or
second-degree relative
TAD indicates thoracic aortic disease.Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e254

FIGURE 17 Evaluation and Genetic Testing Protocol for Patients With TAD
Genetic testing is recommended for individuals with syndromic features, family history of TAD, and/or early age of disease onset. Thoracic aortic im aging is recom-
mended for ﬁrst-degree relatives of all individuals with TAD, regardless of age of onset, to detect asymptomatic aneurysms. Positive genetic testing should tri gger
gene-based management and cascade testing of at-risk relatives. When testing is negative or reveals variants of unknown signi ﬁcance, ﬁrst-degree relatives should
undergo screening aortic imaging. Modi ﬁed with permission from Milewicz et al.6Copyright 2021, Minerva Medica. Blue ( þ) indicates positive; green ( –), negative; LDS,
Loeys-Dietz syndrome; MFS, Marfan syndrome; TAAD, thoracic aortic aneurysm and dissection; TAD, thoracic aortic disease; vEDS, vascular Ehlers-D anlos syndrome;
and VUS, variants of unknown signi ﬁcance. *Aneurysms are typically asymptomatic.JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee255

4. Cascade screening is the process of extending imaging
to identify asymptomatic thoracic aortic enlargementto individuals at risk within a family for inheriting thepathogenic variant causing HTAD in the family; theprocess is repeated as family members are identi ﬁed
with thoracic aortic enlargement or as carriers of the
pathogenic variant are identi ﬁed.
10Pathogenic vari-
ants in genes for HTAD confer a high risk for TAD, soindividuals found to have these pathogenic variantsshould be screened with aortic imaging for asymp-tomatic TAD.
16,24
5. Among patients undergoing genetic testing, many will
not have a pathogenic variant identi ﬁed, despite other
clinical evidence that the disease is likely genetically
triggered (eg, extensive family history of TAD or earlyonset sporadic TAD with no risk factors). Despite theabsence of a pathogenic variant among the currentlyknown genes that were tested, TAD could still beinherited in the family attributable to a causative ge-netic variant that has yet to be identi ﬁed. Conse-
quently, multiple studies have con ﬁrmed the utility of
screening aortic imaging of at-risk relatives of all TAD
patients with a positive family history.
13-15If negative,
repeat screening imaging might be worthwhile in 5years of younger family members or 10 years in olderfamily members, informed by the family history.A d d i t i o n a l l y ,i ti sc r i t i c a lt oo b t a i nr e l e v a n tc l i n i c a ldata from affected family members, including the
location of the aortic dilation (ie., the aortic root versusthe ascending aorta), current aortic diameter or diam-
eter at the time of surgical repair or diameter at thetime of type A aortic dissection, and the presence ofother vascular diseases (eg, aneurysms in other ar-teries, early onset occlusive vascular diseases), as these
will inform management of all affected family mem-
bers. The HTADs vary in terms of the risk of otherclinical cardiovascular complications that segregatewith TAD; therefore, surveillance for such conditions isbest guided by the family history.
22,25-27
6. Although the data are more limited, studies also sup-
port the screening of ﬁrst-degree relatives of patients
with TAD who do not have a family history of the dis-
ease.13If negative, aortic imaging may be repeated
years later, depending on the relative ’sa g ea n da o r t i c
s i z e .I ts h o u l db er e c o g n i z e dt h a tt h e r ei sn ou p p e rlimit to the age at which patients present with TAD thatprecludes an underlying gen etic cause of the disease.
7. Because the size at which the aortic root or ascending
aorta dissects impacts the ri sk of aortic dissection in
other affected family members, the speci ﬁca o r t i cd i -
ameters should be recorded in the medical record (ie,
operative report, discharge summary), so that the in-formation can be readily retrieved when needed in thefuture.
6.1.2.1.1. Surgical Considerations for Nonsyndromic Heritable
TAAs and No Identi ﬁed Genetic Cause
Recommendations for Surgical Consideration s for Nonsyndromic Heritable TAA and No Identi ﬁed Genetic Cause
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 C-LD1. In asymptomatic patients with aneurysms of the ao rtic root or ascending aorta with nonsyndromic her-
itable thoracic aortic disease (nsHTAD) and no identi ﬁed genetic cause, determining the timing of surgical
repair requires shared decision-making and is infor med by known aortic diameters at the time of aortic
dissection, TAA repair, or both in affected family members.1-4
1 C-LD2. In asymptomatic patients with aneurysms of the aortic root or ascending aorta with nsHTAD and no
identi ﬁed genetic cause but no information on aortic di ameters at the time of dissection or aneurysm
repair in affected family members and who have n o high-risk features for adverse aortic events ( Table 9 )
it is recommended to repair the aorta when the maximal diameter reaches ‡5.0 cm.1
2a C-LD3. In patients with aneurysms of the aortic root or ascending aorta with nsHTAD and no identi ﬁed genetic
cause and a maximal aortic diameter of ‡4.5 cm, who have high-risk feat ures for adverse aortic events
(Table 9 ), or who are undergoing cardiac surgery for other indications, aortic repair is reasonable when
performed by experienced surgeons in a Multidisciplinary Aortic Team.5Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e256

Synopsis
HTAD refers to TAD caused by a highly penetrant rare
variant (or mutation) in a single gene. A diagnosis ofHTAD is based on $2 members of a family with TAD,
the identi ﬁcation of a pathogenic variant in the gene
known to cause TAD in a family member, or clinical
diagnosis of syndrome that confers a risk for TAD (eg,
Marfan syndrome) in a family member. SyndromicHTAD typically has systemic features with multiorganphenotype, positive family history of aortic aneurysm ordissection, and is often cau sed by mutations involving
extracellular matrix prote ins or involved in trans-
forming growth factor-
bpathway. Such patients,
including Marfan syndrome and Loeys-Dietz syndrome,
are predisposed to developing aneurysms of the aortic
root and ascending aorta at an early age, and have afaster rate of aortic growth than do those with sporadicaneurysms. Consequently, these patients have a higherrisk of acute aortic dissection or rupture, resulting in ashorter life expectancy than those patients whose an-eurysms are not genetically mediated. Prophylacticsurgery to replace the aortic root and ascending aorta
has dramatically improved the overall life expectancy of
HTAD patients. Prophylactic elective surgery in theseyoung patients requires a very low operative mortalitywith a multidisciplinary approach for genetic testingand lifelong surveillance. Surgeons in MultidisciplinaryAortic Teams have shown suf ﬁciently low operative
mortality to safely treat these patients at smaller aorticsizes. Similar to what is seen with sporadic aneurysms,
aortic dissection in HTAD can occur at aortic diameters
smaller than the surgical thresholds recommended inguidelines.
nsHTAD refers to a genetic predisposition to TAD
running in families in the absence of systemic features.NsHTAD may be present in up to 20% of patients withTAD (based on family history), is typically inherited in anautosomal dominant manner, with a pathogenic genetic
variant identi ﬁed in up to 20%. When no pathogenic
variant is identi ﬁed in families with nsHTAD, it has often
been referred to as “familial thoracic aortic aneurysm and
dissection. ”I tt e n d st ob em o r ep e n e t r a n ta n do fe a r l i e r
o n s e ti nm e nt h a nw o m e nw i t h i na f f e c t e df a m i l i e s .T h ediagnosis is often delayed until midlife but occurs earlierthan for sporadic aneurysms; aneurysm growth is also
typically faster than for sporadic aneurysms. Because theinitial presentation is commonly acute aortic dissection,screening family members is important to guide prophy-lactic surgery to prevent potential aortic dissection.
Clearly, elective surgery before aortic dissection yields
better long-term survival with fewer aortic reinterven-tions than surgery after aortic dissection.
4-7
Recommendation-Speci ﬁcS u p p o r t i v eT e x t
1. The GenTAC (National Regi stry of Genetically Trig-
g e r e dT h o r a c i cA o r t i cA n e u r y s m sa n dC a r d i o v a s c u l a rConditions) study found a higher risk of dissection,
with most of dissection patients not having met the
size criteria for prophylactic surgery.
1,6For patients
with a family history of TAA, aortic dissection, or both,but with no known pathogenic variant, it is useful todetermine the size at which the aorta dissected (ifknown) or the size at which elective aortic surgery wasperformed, as well as the age of the affected relative attime of the aortic event. It is appropriate to offer aortic
repair based on the family member ’sa o r t i cs i z ea t
dissection or elective surgery.
2. Patients with a family history of TAAs but with no
known pathogenic variant may not have informationregarding the aneurysm size at which the familymembers underwent either elective surgery or experi-enced aortic dissection. However, the GenTAC studysuggested a higher risk of aort ic dissection, with a large
proportion of patients not having met the 5.5-cm
threshold for elective repair at the time of their aorticdissection. Given that aortic dissection in this popula-tion with familial TAAs may occur at younger ages andwith worse outcomes and the more frequent need forreoperations, prophylactic surgery is warranted whenthe maximal diameter of the aortic root or ascendingaorta reaches $5.0 cm.
1-4,8
3. For patients with a family history of aortic dissection at
a known maximal aortic root or ascending aorticdiameter <5.0 cm but with no known pathogenic
variant, it is reasonable to pe rform prophylactic aortic
repair at a maximal aortic diameter of $4.5 cm, because
their affected relative experi enced an aortic dissection
at the relatively small diameter of <5.0 cm. Similarly,
patients with relatives whose aortic dissection or un-
explained sudden death occurred at an age <50 years
are themselves at increased risk of such adverse eventsat ages <5 0y e a r sa sw e l l .S i m i l a r l y ,n s H T A Dp a t i e n t s
who have documented rapid aneurysm growth areincreased risk of untoward aortic events at youngerages and smaller aneurysm sizes, so prophylactic aorticsurgery is reasonable when performed by experiencedsurgeons in Multidisciplinary Aortic Teams, with
shown excellent short- and long-term outcomes.
1-4,8TABLE 9Features Associated With an Increased Risk of
A o r t i cD i s s e c t i o ni nP a t i e n t sW i t hH e r i t a b l eThoracic Aortic Aneurysms
Heritable Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms and No Identi ﬁed Genetic Cause
Family history of aortic dissection at an aortic diameter <5.0 cm
Family history of unexplained sudden death at age <50 y
Rapid aortic growth ( $0.5 cm in 1 y or $0.3 cm/y in 2 consecutive y)JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee257

6.1.2.2. Marfan Syndrome
6.1.2.2.1. Diagnostic and Surveillance Aortic Imaging in Marfan
Syndrome
Synopsis
Marfan syndrome is an autosomal dominant connec-
tive tissue disorder caused by pathogenic variants in theFBN1 gene affecting 1 in 5,000 individuals.
1Phenotypic
features in the skeletal, ocular, pulmonary, cutaneous,
nervous, and cardiovascular systems may be recognized.The modi ﬁed Ghent criteria for di agnosis incorporate
genetic testing, the systemic score, ectopia lentis, and thefamily history.
1Patients with Marfan syndrome develop
aneurysms involving the aortic root (sinuses of Valsalva)and are at risk for aortic dissection.
1Descending aortic
and AAAs are less common.6,7Type B aortic dissection is
the initial aortic event in about 10% of patients and may
also occur despite previous root replacement.4Imaging
surveillance of the aorta is typically performed annually,with the frequency dependent on age, aortic diameter,rate of aortic growth, and family history.
8Prophylactic
aortic root replacement for aneurysm disease preventstype A dissection and improves survival in Marfansyndrome.
3,9,10
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Aortic root dilation and typ eAa o r t i cd i s s e c t i o na r et h e
leading causes of morbidi ty and mortality in Marfan
syndrome.9,10Aortic dilation involves the aortic root,but effacement of the sinotubular junction with
enlargement of the proximal ascending aorta is oftenpresent.
11The aortic root and ascending aorta are
measured by TTE and are observed annually. Nomo-
grams accounting for age, sex, and body size (and
height) assist with determining the degree to which thediameter deviates from norm al in the general popula-
tion.
12In patients with Marfan syndrome participating
in trials of beta blockers versus angiotensin receptorblockers (ARBs), the mean growth of the aortic root was1m mt o1 . 5m mo v e r3y e a r sa n d4m mt o5m mo v e r5years. The rate of aortic dilation is faster in patients
with larger aortic aneurysms. More frequent imaging is
performed in patients with rapid aortic growth, inthose approaching surgical thresholds, or when thediameter exceeds 4.5 cm. Patients with Marfan syn-drome are at greatest risk for aneurysmal dilation ofthe aortic root, followed by involvement of theascending aorta. Patient-speci ﬁcf a c t o r s ,s u c ha sp e c -
tus deformities and lung disease, may limit the evalu-
ation of the aortic root on TTE. When the aortic root
and ascending aorta are not adequately visualized byTTE, CT or MRI should be performed to measure theaortic diameters,
2although TEE is another alternative
to measure the aortic root and ascending aorta.Recommendations for Diagnostic and Surveillance Aortic Imaging in Marfan Syndrome
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
Initial Diagnosis and Surveillance Imaging
1 C-EO1. In patients with Marfan syndrome, a TTE is recommend ed at the time of initial diagnosis, to determine the
diameters of the aortic root and ascending aorta, and 6 months thereafter, to determine the rate of aortic
growth; if the aortic diameters are stable, an annual surveillance TTE is recommended.1
If the aortic root, ascending aorta, or both are not adequately visualized on TTE, a CT or MRI of the
thoracic aorta is recommended.2
2a C-EO2. In adults with Marfan syndrome, after the initial TTE, a CT or MRI of the thoracic aorta is reasonable to
conﬁrm the aortic diameters and assess the remainder of the thoracic aorta.
Imaging After Aortic Root Replacement
1 C-LD3. In patients with Marfan syndrome who have undergone aortic root replacement, surveillance imaging of
the thoracic aorta by MRI (or CT) is recommended to eval uate for distal TAD, initially annually and then, if
normal in diameter and unchanged after 2 years, every other year.3-6
2a C-LD4. In patients with Marfan syndrome who have undergone aortic root replacement, surveillance imaging
every 3 to 5 years for potential AAA is reasonable.2,6Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e258

2. Patients with Marfan synd rome may develop disease of
the descending aorta.9,10In some individuals, a thor-
ough TTE may accurately assess the diameters of aorticroot, ascending aorta, aortic a r c h ,p r o x i m a ld e s c e n d i n g
aorta, and distal descending aorta. For patients un-
dergoing an initial evaluation in whom the aortic seg-
ments distal to the ascending aorta are not adequatelyvisualized on TTE, a CT or MRI can be used to assessthe more distal aortic segments.
3. Surgical aortic root replacement can prevent type A
aortic dissection and improve longevity for patientswith Marfan syndrome and a ortic root aneurysms.
3,9,10Long-term complications after aortic root replacement
may include graft infections, pseudoaneurysms, an-eurysms in the distal aorta, and aortic dissection distalto the graft.
4,13
4. In patients with Marfan syndrome, distal TAA and AAA
(in the absence of aortic dissection) may occur but are
much less common than aortic root disease. Most in-dividuals with aortic disease distal to the root have hadprevious root replacement or smoke cigarettes.
7,13
6.1.2.2.2. Medical Therapy in Marfan Syndrome
Recommendations for Medica l Therapy in Marfan Syndrome
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1A1. In patients with Marfan syndrome, treatment with either a beta blocker or an ARB, in maximally tolerated
doses (unless contraindicated), is recomme nded to reduce the rate of aortic dilation.1,2
2a C-LD2. In patients with Marfan syndrome, the use of both a beta blocker and an ARB, in maximally tolerated
doses (unless contraindicated), is reasonable to reduce the rate of aortic dilation.3,4
Recommendations for Marfan Syndrome I nterventions: Replacement of the Aortic Root in Patients With Marfan Syndrome
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In patients with Marfan syndrome and an aortic root diameter of ‡5.0 cm, surgery to replace the aortic
root and ascending aorta is recommended.1-4
2a B-NR2. In patients with Marfan syndrome, an aortic root diameter of ‡4.5 cm, and features associated with an
increased risk of aortic dissection ( Table 10 ), surgery to replace the aortic root and ascending aorta is
reasonable, when performed by experienced sur geons in a Multidisciplinary Aortic Team.1,3,4Synopsis
Beta blockers have long been recommended for patients
with Marfan syndrome to reduce heart rate and myocar-
dial contractility and to slow aortic root growth.5-7More
recently, ARBs have also been found to be ef ﬁcacious in
Marfan syndrome.1-4,8
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. In an open-label study of patients with Marfan syn-
drome who were observed for >10 years, propranolol
treatment was associated with a reduction in aortic root
growth rate and fewer clinical events5compared with
control (no treatment). More recently, in a retrospectiveevaluation of children with Marfan syndrome, beta-blocker treatment was associated with a reducedaortic growth rate.
6Losartan was shown to prevent
aneurysm formation in mouse models of Marfan syn-drome
9and, in a small, nonrandomized open labelstudy of children with Marfan syndrome who had pre-
viously had rapid aortic root growth, ARBs were shownto dramatically slow aortic root growth.
10However,
randomized trials comparing an ARB to a beta blocker in
patients with Marfan syndrome found no signi ﬁcant
difference in the rate of either aortic root growth orclinical events (including aortic surgery or aorticdissection) between the 2 treatment groups.
1,2
2. Multiple trials have compared the addition of an ARB to
beta-blocker therapy in patients with Marfan syn-drome
3,4,8; in 2 studies, the addition of an ARB led to a
reduction of aortic root growth rates over a 3- to 5-year
follow-up,3,4and a meta-analysis con ﬁrmed slower
aortic growth rates with combination therapy.11
6.1.2.2.3. Marfan Syndrome Interventions: Replacement of the
Aortic Root in Patients With Marfan SyndromeJACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee259

Synopsis
Prophylactic aortic root replacement for aneurysm
disease prevents type A aortic dissection and improvessurvival in Marfan syndrome.
6-8T h es i z et h r e s h o l df o r
elective surgery to replace the dilated aortic root in Mar-
fan syndrome is dependent on many factors, including
the patient ’s age, height and weight, family history, rate
of aortic growth, and other patient-speci ﬁcf a c t o r s .1,3-5,9
In patients with Marfan sy ndrome who are managed
with optimal medical therapy and whose aortic diametersare<5.0 cm, the risk of aortic dissection is low.
3,4,10
However, the risk of aortic dissection increases when
the aortic diameter is >5.0 cm and is greater in patients
with a family history of aortic dissection or rapid aortic
growth.3,4,10
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. In patients with Marfan syndrome and a dilated aortic
root, elective aortic root and ascending aortic replace-
ment before aortic dissection improves survival.6-8A
landmark report in 1995 documented the markedimprovement in lifespan among patients with Marfansyndrome treated with elective aortic repair comparedwith historical controls from previous eras.
6,10
Although risk of aortic dissection is low in patients
with Marfan syndrome who are receiving appropriate
medical care and lifestyle modi ﬁcations, the risk of
aortic dissection increases when the aortic diameter is
>5.0 cm.3,4,11When prophylactic surgical aortic repair
is performed, both the aortic root and ascending aortaare replaced; although some centers have advocatedincluding hemiarch replacement in patients at the timeof elective root/ascending aorta replacement, data tosupport this approach are lacking.
2. In large series of patients with Marfan syndrome, about
20% have undergone elective surgery when aortic rootdiameters are <5.0 cm.
3,4,11Predictors of aortic
dissection and other adverse aortic outcomes in Marfansyndrome are listed in Table 10 . Indications for earlier
aortic surgery may include rapid aortic growth ( $0.3
cm/y), family history of aortic dissection, desire forpregnancy, severe valve regurgitation, and patient
preference.
3,9,12For most patients with Marfansyndrome, aortic growth rates are relatively slow, but
the growth rate increases with aortic size.12
3. Aortic diameters vary depending on age, sex, height,
and body size. Aortic event rates, including aorticdissection, increase as the aortic size indexed to height
(or body size) increases. When the maximal cross-
sectional area in square (cm
2) of the aortic root or
ascending aorta divided by the patient ’sh e i g h t( m )i s
$10 cm2/m, prophylactic aortic root replacement is
reasonable; when this cross-sectional area to heightratio was used to guide proph ylactic surgery, patients
had favorable outcomes.
4. Aortic root replacement is associated with a very low
surgical risk
3,4,11when performed by experienced sur-
geons in Multidisciplinary Aortic Teams. The 2 aorticroot replacement procedures performed mostcommonly in the United States are a composite valvedgraft conduit and a VSRR.
13The composite valved graft
conduit consists of a prosthetic aortic valve (typicallymechanical but may be bioprosthetic) and aortic graft,with reimplantation of the coronary arteries (often
referred to as the modi ﬁed Bentall procedure). The
VSRR uses the David procedure, in which the nativeaortic valve is reimplanted into a prosthetic aortic graftthat is attached to the left ventricular out ﬂow tract
proximally and to the ascending aorta distally. Theadvantage of the VSRR is that, if successful, patientscan potentially avoid the lifelong risks and complica-tions associated with prosthetic valves. Consequently,
early prophylactic surgery can be considered when
both the procedural and la te risks are low. However,
durability of the spared native aortic valve is a poten-tial concern; in one series o f 239 patients with Marfan
syndrome undergoing VSRR, 7% developed at leastmoderate AR at 1 year follow-up.
13
TABLE 10Features Associated With Increased Risk of
Aortic Complications in Marfan Syndrome
nFamily history of aortic dissection
nRapid aortic growth ( $0.3 cm/y)
nDiffuse aortic root and ascending aortic dilation14
nMarked vertebral arterial tortuosity152a C-LD3. In patients with Marfan syndrome and a maximal cross-sectional aortic root area (cm2) to patient height
(m) ratio of ‡10, surgery to replace the aortic root and ascen ding aorta is reasonable, when performed by
experienced surgeons in a Multi disciplinary Aortic Team.5
2b C-LD4. In patients with Marfan syndrome and an aortic diameter approaching surgical threshold, who are can-
didates for valve-sparing root replacement (VSRR) an d have a very low surgical risk, surgery to replace
the aortic root and ascending aorta may be reason able when performed by experienced surgeons in a
Multidisciplinary Aortic Team.2-4(Continued)Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e260

6.1.2.2.4. Marfan Syndrome Interventions: Replacement of
Primary (Nondissected) Aneurysms of the Aortic Arch,Descending, and Abdominal Aorta in Patients WithMarfan Syndrome
Synopsis
Marfan syndrome most commonly leads to aneurysms
of the aortic root and ascending aorta but may also affectthe distal aorta and its branches.
1-4Unfortunately, there
are no large datasets to inform the risk of aortic dissection
or rupture in patients with Marfan syndrome with pri-mary (nondissected) aneurysms of the aortic arch,descending, or abdominal aorta, so using a 5.0-cm diam-eter threshold for surgery, as is used for the aortic root, isreasonable.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Although uncommon, aortic segments distal to the
aortic root and ascending aorta may dilate in Marfansyndrome, and this occurs more often after electiveaortic root replacement or after a previous aorticdissection involving these segments.
5In patients at
acceptable risk for operative repair or with a long lifeexpectancy, operative intervention to resect primary(nondissected) aneurysms involving the arch,
descending, or abdominal aorta is reasonable at an
aortic diameter threshold of $5.0 cm, depending on the
patient ’s age, rate of aortic growth, family history, and
surgical risk. Type B aortic dissection occurs in about10% of Marfan patients, often in the absence of signif-icant dilation of the descending aorta, and is sometimesassociated with prior elective aortic root replacement,
1
a previous aortic dissection elsewhere,6or pregnancy.7
6.1.2.3. Loeys-Dietz Syndrome
6.1.2.3.1. Imaging in Loeys-Dietz SyndromeRecommendation for Repla cement of Primary (Nondissected) Aneurys ms of the Aortic Arch, Descending, and
Abdominal Aorta in Patients With Marfan Syndrome
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
2a C-EO1. In patients with Marfan syndrome and a nondissected aneurysm of the aortic arch, descending thoracic
aorta, or abdominal aorta of ‡5.0 cm, surgical intervention to replace the aneurysmal segment is
reasonable.
Recommendations for Imaging in Loeys-Dietz Syndrome
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 C-EO1. In patients with Loeys-Dietz syndrome, a baselin e TTE is recommended to determine the diameters of the
aortic root and ascending aorta, and 6 months thereafter to determine the rate of aortic growth; if theaortic diameters are stable, annual surveillance TTE is recommended.
1-3
1 C-EO2. In patients with Loeys-Dietz syndrome and a dilated or dissected aorta and/or arterial branches at
baseline, annual surveillance imag ing of the affected aorta and arteries with MRI or CT is recommended.1
1 C-LD3. In patients with Loeys-Dietz syndrome, a basel ine MRI or CT from head to pelvis is recommended to
evaluate the entire aorta and its branches for aneurysm, dissection, and tortuosity.1-4
2a C-EO4. In patients with Loeys-Dietz syndrome without dilat ion of the aorta distal to the aortic root or ascending
aorta and without dilated or dissected arterial branches, surveillance imaging from chest to pelvis with
MRI (or CT) every 2 years is reasonable, but imaging may be more frequent depending on family history.
2a C-EO5. In patients with Loeys-Dietz syndrome without dilation of the cerebral arteries on initial screening, pe-
riodic imaging surveillance for cerebral aneurysms with MRI or CT every 2 to 3 years is reasonable.JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee261

Synopsis
Loeys-Dietz syndrome is characterized by aortic and
branch vessel aneurysms and dissections, arterial tortu-osity, and skeletal features similar to those seen in Marfansyndrome but with unique craniofacial and cutaneous
features.
1Pathogenic variants in 5 genes cause Loeys-
Dietz syndrome, also termed transforming growth factor-
bvasculopathies.1-3,5,6Some pathogenic variants in Loeys-
Dietz syndrome genes, in particular TGFBR1 and TGFBR2 ,
may have earlier onset TAD.7All the Loeys-Dietz syn-
drome genes confer a risk for aortic involvement distal tothe aortic root along with branch vessel and intracranialaneurysms.
1,8-11Most clinical information is available in
patients with TGFBR1 and TGFBR2 pathogenic variants.1,8
Pathogenic variants in SMAD3 are associated with pre-
mature osteoarthritis and later onset of TAD.9,12There is
much less information about the aortic and branch vesseldisease in patients with variants in TGFB2 and TGFB3 .
13-16
I m a g i n gw i t hC To rM R I ,f r o mh e a dt op e l v i s ,i si n d i c a t e d
to evaluate for aneurysms and arterial tortuosity.Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Aortic root and ascending aortic aneurysm and aortic
dissection are leading causes of morbidity and mor-tality in Loeys-Dietz syndrome.
1,8,9,12Aortic dissection
may occur at relatively small aortic diameters in Loeys-
Dietz syndrome when related to pathogenic variants in
TGFBR1 ,TGFBR2 ,a n d SMAD3.1,2,6The speci ﬁc genetic
variant and severity of extra-aortic phenotypic fea-tures, including craniofacial features, degree of arterialtortuosity, cutaneous ﬁndings, and family history
inform the risk of aortic events.
1,2,6The aortic root and
ascending aortic diameters are typically measured by
TTE. BAV is more common in Loeys-Dietz syndrome
and can be diagnosed by TTE.17Patients with Loeys-
Dietz syndrome attributable to certain pathogenicvariants are at risk for aortic dissection at relativelysmall aortic diameters.
1,8In patients with Loeys-Dietz
syndrome, the stability of the aortic size 6 months af-ter the initial diagnosis should be determined, andthen, once stability is con ﬁrmed, monitored with
annual surveillance imaging.
1,22. Patients with Loeys-Dietz syndrome may have variable
aortic and branch vessel involvement and variablerates of dilation of involved arterial segments overtime. In Loeys-Dietz syndrome patients with aorticaneurysm or previous dissection, relatively rapid
arterial enlargement may occur.
2,18,19
3. Patients with Loeys-Dietz syndrome are at risk for
widespread aortic and branch vessel aneurysmal dis-ease and dissections.
1,12In a series of 90 patients with
Loeys-Dietz syndrome attributable to pathogenic vari-ants in TGFBR1 and TGFBR2 , aneurysm disease
involved the ascending aorta in 78%, arch in 10%,descending aorta in 10%, abdominal aorta and
branches in 17%, thoracic aortic branches in 21%, and
head and neck arterial branches in 10%.
1Among pa-
tients with SMAD3 -related disease, aneurysms from
head to pelvis are also described.9,12Individuals with
Loeys-Dietz syndrome can be at risk for TAD and othervascular diseases in the absence of other systemicfeatures characteristic of Marfan syndrome or Loeys-Dietz syndrome. Although there is phenotypic overlap
among the genes, there is also distinct vascular disease
and systemic complications associated with each gene.The physician should be cognizant of the particulargene variant in monitoring and managing patients withLoeys-Dietz syndrome.
4. In patients with Loeys-Dietz syndrome and aortic dis-
ease limited to segments that are well-visualized byTTE and without branch vessel disease, surveillance of
the distal aorta and its branches is needed to evaluate
for the possible interval occurrence of dilation (ordissection); the frequency of surveillance imaging maybe in ﬂuenced by the patient ’s age and family history.
2
5. Cerebral aneurysms are described in 10% to 18% of
patients with Loeys-Dietz syndrome.1,9,11,20The fre-
quency of follow-up screening for cerebral aneurysmdisease in patients without aneurysms on initial
screening will depend on the patient ’sa g ea n dm a yb e
informed by phenotype or other features.
11
6.1.2.3.2. Medical Therapy in Loeys-Dietz Syndrome
Recommendation for Medical The rapy in Loeys-Dietz Syndrome
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
2a C-EO1. In patients with Loeys-Dietz syndrome, treatment w ith a beta blocker or an ARB (unless contraindicated),
or both, in maximally tolerated doses, is reasonable.Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e262

Synopsis
The management of individuals with Loeys-Dietz syn-
drome includes medical therapy, lifestyle modi ﬁcation,
imaging surveillance, and surgical intervention. To lessenhemodynamic stress on the aorta, beta blockers are used.
1
Based on studies of mouse m odels, ARBs have also been
used.2
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. There are no randomized trials of medications to
reduce aortic growth or the risk of aortic dissection inpatients with Loeys-Dietz syndrome. Consequently, the
approach to medical therapy is similar to that used fortreating patients with Marf an syndrome, based on the
similarities between the 2 connective tissue disordersand on data from mouse models of Loeys-Dietz syn-
drome.
2Thus, the use of beta blockers, ARBs, or both is
reasonable.1
6.1.2.3.3. Loeys-Dietz Syndrome Surgical Interventions:
Replacement of the Aorta in Patients With
Loeys-Dietz Syndrome
Recommendations for Replacement of the Aorta in Patients With Loeys-Dietz Syndrome
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 C-LD1. In patients with Loeys-Dietz syndrome and aortic dila tion, the surgical threshold for prophylactic aortic
root and ascending aortic replacement should be informed by the speci ﬁc genetic variant, aortic diameter,
aortic growth rate, extra-aortic features, family hi story, patient age and sex, and physician and patient
preferences ( Table 11 ).1-9
2b C-EO2. In patients with Loeys-Dietz syndrom e attributable to a pathogenic variant in TGFBR1 ,TGFBR2 ,o r
SMAD3 , surgery to replace the intact aortic arch, des cending aorta, or abdominal aorta at a diameter
of‡4.5 cm may be considered, with the speci ﬁc genetic variant, patient age, aortic growth rate, family
history, presence of high-risk features ( Table 11 ), and surgical risk informing the decision.
Synopsis
In patients with Loeys-Dietz syndrome, prophylactic
aortic root replacement for aneurysm disease preventstype A aortic dissection and improves outcomes.
1,2,10-12
Aortic dissection in Loeys-Dietz syndrome that is attrib-
utable to pathogenic variants in TGFBR1, TGFBR2 ,a n d
SMAD3 may occur at smaller aortic diameters than in
Marfan syndrome.1-3,13Based on limited data, Loeys-Dietz
syndrome attributable to pathogenic variants inTGFB2
5,6,14and TGFB38,9may have a less aggressive aortic
phenotype than disease attributable to TGFBR1 ,TGFBR2 ,
orSMAD3 variants.1,2,4,15,16The size threshold for elective
surgery to replace the dilated aortic root and ascending
aorta in Loeys-Dietz syndrome depends on multiple fac-
tors and is informed by the speci ﬁcp a t h o g e n i cv a r i a n t ,
phenotypic features, patient age, aortic growth rates, andfamily history ( Table 11 ).
1,2,10-12 ,17
T h e r ei sl i t t l ei n f o r m a t i o na b o u ts i z et h r e s h o l d sf o r
prophylactic surgery in Loeys-Dietz syndrome to lessenthe risk of aortic dissection or rupture when there areintact aneurysms involving the aortic arch, descending, or
abdominal aorta, or involving aortic branch vessels.
11,12,18
After aortic dissection, progressive aneurysmal dilation
commonly occurs and often requires multiple operativeinterventions.
11,12,18
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Pathogenic variants in TGFBR1 ,TGFBR2 ,SMAD3 ,
TGFB2 ,a n d TGFB3 lead to Loeys-Dietz syndrome or
may cause aortopathy with few outward features. Most
information is available for TGFBR1 and TGFBR2pathogenic variants.1,2Patients with TGFBR1 and
TGFBR2 v a r i a n t sa r ea tr i s ko ft y p eAa o r t i cd i s s e c t i o na t
younger ages and smaller aort ic root diameters than in
Marfan syndrome.1,17,19This aggressive aortopathy,
especially in those with severe craniofacial features,
previously led to a recommendation for surgery at an
aortic root diameter of >4.0 cm.1The “2010 ACC/AHA
Guidelines for the Management of Thoracic Aortic Dis-ease ”recommended aortic surgery at a diameter be-
tween 4.2 cm and 4.6 cm, depending on imagingmodality.
20SMAD3- related Loeys-Dietz syndrome var-
iants may lead to aortic dissection at variable di-ameters.
4,15,16,20Aortic dissection risk is higher in
women with TGFBR2 variants who have certain extra-
aortic features.2Limited data have not suggested higher
aortic dissection risk at smaller aortic size in those withTGFB2
5,6,14orTGFB3 variants.8,9Marked intrafamilial
variability exists for aortic disease in Loeys-Dietz syn-drome.
17,21,22A shared decision about timing of pro-
phylactic surgery to prevent type A aortic dissection inLoeys-Dietz syndrome should include consideration of
the speci ﬁc genetic variant, aortic diameter, aortic
growth rate, age, sex, body size, family history, patientpreferences, and surgical expertise.
2. Aneurysms of the distal ascending aorta, arch,
descending aorta, and abdominal aorta may occur inLoeys-Dietz syndrome.
1,2,5,8,9,11-14 ,16,17At the time of
aortic root replacement, the entire ascending aorta is
also to be replaced because distal ascending aortic
aneurysm and dissection may occur after isolated aorticJACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee263

root replacement.10-12 ,19There is little information
about aortic size thresholds at which the risk of aorticdissection warrants elective surgery in the intact aorticarch, descending, or abdominal aorta in Loeys-Dietzsyndrome. A shared decision should consider thepathogenic variant, aortic diameter, rate of aorticgrowth, age, sex, body size, patient preference, and the
surgeon ’s preference and surgical expertise. Aortic in-
terventions in Loeys-Dietz syndrome are especiallycommon after aortic dissection.
10-12
6.1.2.4. Vascular Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome: Imaging,
Medical Therapy, and Surgical Intervention
Vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, affecting 1 in 50,000 to
100,000 individuals, is attributable to pathogenic variantsinCOL3A1 and leads to spontaneous aortic and arterial
dissections, aneurysms, and rupture at young ages.
1,2The
onset and severity of arterial pathology correlates withthe speci ﬁcCOL3A1 pathogenic variant.
2Imaging the
aorta and branches may identify arterial segments atrisk, but the frequency of sc reening surveillance is
uncertain.
1-4Typical protocols include baseline MRI or CT
from head to pelvis to evaluate the entire aorta and itsbranches, with annual survei llance imaging thereafter to
monitor any dilated or dissected aortic or arterial seg-ments and imaging every 2 years when the initial imagingis normal.
1,2,5Notably, the aorta and arterial branches in
vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome may rupture (or dissect)even without signi ﬁcant dilation.
1-3
Medical therapy of vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
includes educatio n, lifestyle modi ﬁcation, and avoidance
of invasive procedures when possible.3,6Studies of cel-
iprolol, a beta blocker with vasodilatory properties,have suggested a bene ﬁt in patients with vascular
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome,
7,8but data were considered to
be insuf ﬁcient for US Food and Drug Administration(FDA) approval. In the absence of data showing ef ﬁcacy in
vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, other beta blockers areoften prescribed, with some physicians choosing alter-native beta blockers with vasodilatory properties. Thereare no studies showing a bene ﬁto fA R B si nv a s c u l a r
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
Surgical repair in vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
carries an increased risk because of vascular fragility and
associated bleeding complications.
1-3,5Rapid arterial
aneurysm growth or the occurrence of dissection are in-dications for treatment,
1-3,5but no data are available to
guide diameter thresholds for prophylactic surgicalintervention for aortic and arterial branch vessel aneu-rysms in vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
1-5Conse-
quently, the decision to intervene for aortic and branch
vessel aneurysms and dissections involves a Multidisci-
plinary Aortic Team and shared decision-making.3,6Open
surgery requires meticulous technique to lessen vascularand tissue trauma, and interventional techniques mayinvolve arterial embolization and endovascular therapy,depending on individual circumstances.
1,3,5
Guidelines for management of pregnancy in vascular
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome are limited, given the lack of
data and the rarity of the condition.9The decision to
proceed with pregnancy in vascular Ehlers-Danlos syn-drome is complex; for some women with speci ﬁc genetic
variants, null mutations, and normal vascular imaging,the risk may be lower, but shared decision-making isessential.
9Of 38 women with vascular Ehlers-Danlos
syndrome completing 82 deliveries, only 13% wereaware of their diagnosis before pregnancy.
9Tissue
fragility complicates labor and delivery and poses risks for
vascular events and wound complications.9,10Complica-
tions may occur after vaginal or cesarean deliveries, butmost women known to have vascular Ehlers-Danlos syn-drome undergo cesarean delivery.
9-12TABLE 11Surgical Thresholds for Prophylactic Aortic Root and Asc ending Aortic Replacement in Loeys-Dietz Syndrome Based
on Genetic Variant
COR LOE (references) Genetic Variant Presence of High-Risk Features * Aortic Diameter (cm)
1 C-LD2TGFBR1 No ‡4.5
1 C-LD2TGFBR2 No ‡4.5
2b C-EO2TGFBR1 Yes ‡4.0
2a C-LD1,2TGFBR2 Yes ‡4.0
2a C-EO13,16SMAD3 – ‡4.5†
2b C-EO5-7TGFB2 ‡ – ‡4.5†
2b C-EO9,23TGFB3 – ‡5.0†
*Aortic surgery may be recommended at smaller aortic diameters in Loeys-Dietz syndrome attributable to TGFBR1 and TGFBR2 pathogenic variants when there are features that
associate with a higher risk of aortic dissection, including: certain speci ﬁc pathogenic variants; women with TGFBR2 and small body size; severe extra-aortic features (ie, craniosy-
nostosis, cleft palate, hypertelorism, bi ﬁd uvula, marked arterial tortuosity, widened scars, and translucent skin); family history of aortic dissection (especially at young age or relative ly
small aortic diameter); and aortic growth rate >0.3 cm/y.
†Family history, age, and aortic growth rate also inform surgical thresholds.
‡Pathogenic variants in the TGFB2 gene are different than variants in the TGFBR2 gene.
Colors correspond to COR and LOE in Table 2 .
COR indicates class of recommendation; and LOE, level of evidence.Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e264

6.1.2.5. Turner Syndrome
Synopsis
Turner syndrome, which affects 1 in 2,500 liveborn
girls, results from complete o r partial loss of the second X
chromosome in all or some of the cells of an individual.9,12
Approximately 50% of patients with Turner syndrome
have cardiovascular defects that include BAV (15%-30%),
aortic coarctation (7%-18%), and ascending aortic dilation
(33%).9,12Patients with Turner syndrome require cardiac
imaging to evaluate for congenital heart and aortic de-fects and to determine aortic diameters. Patients withTurner syndrome are at increas ed risk of aortic dissection,
with 85% occurring in the ascending and 15% in thedescending aorta.
10,11,13Risk factors for aortic dissection
include aortic dilation, hypertension, BAV, and aortic
coarctation.9-11,13Because Turner syndrome patients are
of short stature, type A aortic dissection may occur atrelatively small aortic diameters; consequently, indexingthe aortic diameter to body size (ie, calculating an ASI) isrecommended in monitoring the aorta.
9,12,14Recommendation-Speci ﬁcS u p p o r t i v eT e x t
1. Turner syndrome may be recognized in infancy or
childhood or, alternatively, go unrecognized untiladolescence or adulthood. On the diagnosis of Turnersyndrome, a TTE and cardiac MRI are performed toevaluate for associated congenital cardiovascular ab-normalities (BAV, aortic coarctation, and others) and tomeasure aortic diameters.
9,12
2. Because patients with Turner syndrome have short
stature, using absolute aortic diameters alone mayunderestimate aortic dissection risk.
9-11,13Type A aortic
dissection in Turner syndrome may occur at relativelys m a l la o r t i cd i a m e t e r s ,l i k e l yr e ﬂecting the typical pa-
tient ’s short stature, so indexing of aortic diameter to
body size (by calculating the ASI) is performed whenevaluating patients with Turner syndrome who are $15
years old.
9,10The ASI is calculated by dividing the
maximal aortic diameter, in centimeters, by the BSA, inRecommendations for Diagnostic Testing, Surveillance, and Surgical Intervention for Aortic Dilation in Turner Syndrome
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In patients with Turner syndrome, TTE and cardiac MRI are recommended at the time of diagnosis to
evaluate for BAV, aortic root and ascending aortic dila tion, aortic coarctation, and other congenital heart
defects.1-9
1 B-NR2. In patients with Turner syndrome who are ‡15 years old, the use of the ASI (ratio of aortic diameter [cm]
to BSA [m2]) is recommended to de ﬁne the degree of aortic dilation and assess the risk of aortic
dissection.9,10,11
1 C-LD3. In patients with Turner syndrome wit hout risk factors for aortic dissection ( Table 12 ), surveillance im-
aging with TTE or MRI to evaluate the aorta is recommended every 5 years in children and every 10 years
in adults, as well as before planning a pregnancy.9,10,11
1 C-EO4. In patients with Turner syndrome and an ASI >2.3 cm/m2, surveillance imaging of the aorta is recom-
mended at least annually.9
1 C-EO5. In patients with Turner syndrome and risk factors for aortic dissection ( Table 12 ), surveillance aortic
imaging at an interval depending on the aortic dia meter, ASI, and aortic growth rate is recommended
(Figure 18 ).9
2a C-LD6. In patients with Turnery syndrome who are ‡15 years old and have an ASI of ‡2.5 cm/m2plus risk factors
for aortic dissection ( Table 12 ), surgical intervention to replace the aortic root, ascending aorta, or both is
reasonable.9,10
2b C-EOIn those without risk factors for aortic dissection, surgical intervention to replace the aortic root,
ascending aorta, or both may be considered.JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee265

meters squared. An ASI >2.0 cm/m2is considered to be
abnormal, and an ASI $2.5 cm/m2is associated with an
increased risk of aortic disection.9-11Using a Turner
syndrome-speci ﬁc z-score to assess for aortic dilation
is preferred in children <15 years old.
3. Lifelong surveillance imaging of the aorta is used to
monitor for aortic dilation: For children with Turnersyndrome and no additional risk factors for aortic
dissection, reevaluation at 5-year intervals is appro-priate; for adults with Turner syndrome and noadditional risk factors for aortic dissection, surveil-
lance imaging of the aorta with TTE or MRI every 10y e a r si sa p p r o p r i a t e .
9Surveillance imaging should also
be performed before planned pregnancy.9
4. In Turner syndrome, the risk of aortic dissection cor-
relates with ASI,9and an ASI $2.5 cm/m2is associated
with a signi ﬁcantly increased risk of aortic dissection.
When the ASI approaches this threshold, morefrequent surveillance imaging is appropriate tomonitor aortic diameters.
9
5. In Turner syndrome, risk factors for aortic dissection
include aortic dilation, BAV, aortic coarctation, andhypertension.
9-11,13When these risk factors are present,
surveillance imaging of the aorta is performed more
frequently. For the patients with Turner syndrome whoare$15 years old and have a stable ASI of #2.3 cm/m
2,
surveillance imaging with TTE or MRI is performedTABLE 12Risk Factors for Aortic Dissection in Patients
With Turner Syndrome
nAortic coarctation
nAortic dilation
nBicuspid aortic valve
nHypertension
FIGURE 18 Suggested Aortic Monitoring Protocol for Gi rls and Women With Turner Syndrome Who Are $15 Years of Age
*Surveillance frequency may vary depending on disease severity (ie, aortic valve dysfunction, severity of coarctation obstruction, hypertension, and left ventricular
hypertrophy).Color corresponds to Class of Recommendations in Table 2 .
ASI indicates aortic size index; BAV, bicuspid aortic valve; CoA, coarctation of the aorta; HTN, hypertension; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; and TTE, transthoracic
echocardiography. Modi ﬁed from Silberbach et al.
9Copyright 2018, with permission from American Heart Association, Inc. Modi ﬁed from Gravholt et al.12Copyright
2017, with permission from Bioscienti ﬁca Limited.Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e266

every 2 to 3 years.9In the patients with Turner syn-
drome who are >15 years old with an ASI >2.3 cm/m2,a t
least annual surveillance imaging of the aorta isappropriate.
9The frequency of imaging should be
informed by aortic diameter, aortic growth rate,
severity of hypertension, and aortic valve function
(Figure 18 ).9,12
6. In patients with Turner syndrome, diameter thresholds
for prophylactic surgical replacement of aneurysms ofthe aortic root/ascending ao rtic replacement are based
on retrospective series and case studies.
10,11,13Data
from registries of aortic dissection in Turner syndromereport that the risk of dissection is signi ﬁcantly
increased when the ASI is $2.5 cm/m
2.9-11,13In addition
to aortic size, risk factors for aortic dissection in Turnersyndrome include BAV, aortic coarctation, and hyper-tension.
9,11,13However, decisions using indexed cal-
culations alone for aortic risk determination in short-statured but obese patients with Turner syndrome orthose with low body weight relative to height may beless accurate. In such Turner syndrome patients who
are$15 years old, an absolute aortic diameter of >4.0
cm may be more accurate than ASI in determining therisk of aortic disection.
9For patients with Turner syn-
drome who are <15 years old, a Turner syndrome-
speci ﬁc z-score calculation is appropriate to deter-
mine aortic risk and assess for surgical intervention.9,14
For patients with Turner syndrome without additional
risk factors for aortic dissection, few data exist on the
degree of aortic dilation that warrants surgical
intervention.9
6.1.2.6. Pathogenic or Likely Pathogenic Variants in ACTA2,
PRKG1, MYH11, MYLK, and LOX: Recommendationsfor Surveillance of Aorta, Medical Therapy, andAortic Surgical Intervention
Pathogenic variants in ACTA2 ,PRKG1 ,MYH11 ,MYLK ,a n d
LOX confer a highly penetrant risk for TAD that is
inherited in an autosomal dominant manner.1-4In thesensHTADs, baseline imaging of the thoracic aorta with TTE,
or with CT or MRI if the ascending aorta is not adequatelyvisualized by TTE, is recommended; surveillance imagingis then performed annually, if stable. The arch anddescending aorta may dilate, in which case surveillance
imaging of these segments is also performed. Less
frequent imaging may be considered when the aorta isnormal, depending on gene variant, age, and family his-tory. Beta-blocker therapy is used to lessen hemodynamicstress on the aorta.
Speci ﬁcf e a t u r e sa s s o c i a t e dw i t he a c hg e n ei n c l u d e :
Patients with ACTA2 mutations primarily present with
type A or B aortic dissection, have aneurysms that
involve the root and ascending aorta, and a subset of
pathogenic variants predispose to occlusive vasculardiseases.
2,5-7Screening for coronary artery disease and
cerebrovascular disease is performed in individuals withspeci ﬁcp a t h o g e n i cv a r i a n t s .
5,6,8,9Patients with ACTA2
mutations can suffer type A aortic dissection at aorticdiameters <4.5 cm, and consideration of surgery at
diameters <4.5 cm is informed by the presence of addi-
tional risk factors.
10PRKG1 -related HTAD can present in
t h el a t et e e n sw i t ht y p eAo rBa o r t i cd i s s e c t i o nw i t h o u tprevious aortic enlargement
11-13;p a t i e n t sw i t h MYH11
mutations primarily present with type A or B aorticdissection (type A aortic dissection may present at aorticdiameters <5.0 cm), have aneurysms that involve the
root and ascending aorta, and may have peripheralarterial disease
4,14; patients with MYLK mutations pre-
sent at age >40 years with type A aortic dissection with
little previous enlargement of the aorta (median aorticdiameter, 4.25 cm)
3,15,16;p a t i e n t sw i t h LOX mutations
can present with aortic root an eurysms, fusiform dilation
of the root and ascending aorta that can extend into theaortic arch, or type A aortic dissection, and they mayhave mild systemic features of Marfan syndrome.
1,17,18
The decision regarding the timing of aortic repair in
nsHTAD is based on the aortic diameter, age, family
history, and the presence or absence of additional riskfactors ( Table 13 ).
TABLE 13Surgical Thresholds for Prophylactic Aortic Root and Asc ending Aortic Replacement in Nonsyndromic Heritable
Thoracic Aortic Disease Based on the Genetic Variant and Additional Risk Factors for Aortic Dissection
COR* LOE* Genetic Variant Risk Factors Aortic Diameter (cm)
2a C-LD ACTA2 No $4.5
2b C-EO ACTA2 Yes† $4.2
2b C-LD PRKG1 No $4.2
2b C-EO PRKG1 Yes† $4.0†
*Patient has risk factors for aortic dissection (family history of type A aortic dissection with minimal aortic enlargement, aortic growth rate $0.3 cm/y) or signi ﬁcant valve disease
requiring surgery.
†Earlier surgery may be considered in patients with a family history of type A aortic dissection in the setting of no or minimal aortic dilation, aortic g rowth rate $0.3 cm/y, or at the
patient ’s request.
Colors correspond to COR and LOE in Table 2 .
COR indicates class of recommendation; and LOE, level of evidence.JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee267

6.1.3. BAV Aortopathy
Synopsis
BAV is a common congenital valve condition affecting
approximately 1% of the population, with a 2 to 3:1 male-to-female predominance.
3BAV most often occurs
sporadically but may be inherited in an autosomal domi-
nant pattern with variable penetrance.5AB A Vm a yb e
isolated or associated with other congenital cardiovascu-lar defects or aortopathy conditions.
5BAV is often asso-
ciated with aortic valve dysfunction (stenosis orregurgitation) and is at risk of infective endocarditis. Pa-tients with a BAV often have aortic dilation or aneurysmsaffecting the aortic root, ascending aorta, or both, withthe prevalence of aortic aneurysm increasing with age.
11
Distinct aortic dilation phenotypes have beendescribed.
1,12Those with BAV and a dilated aorta are at
risk for type A aortic dissection.11,13,14Patients with BAV
require lifelong surveillance imaging of the aorta, evenafter AVR.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Aortic dilation in BAV may affect the aortic root, the
ascending aorta, or both. The ascending aorta is most
commonly involved, and the dilation sometimes ex-tends up into the arch.
1-3T h ep r e v a l e n c eo fa o r t i c
dilation in BAV is reported from 20% to 84%,depending on the population studied and the de ﬁni-
tion of aortic dilation.
3,12Patients with BAV and aortic
dilation are at risk for aortic dissection.3,11,13The aortic
root, ascending aorta, arch, and proximal descendinga o r t as h o u l db ei m a g e db yT T Et oe v a l u a t ef o r
aortic valve function, aortic dilation, and aorticcoarctation.
1-4Conversely, in other patients undergo-
ing TTE, a ﬁnding of unexplained aortic root,
ascending aortic dilation, or both should prompt sus-
picion of an underlying BAV15; if TTE of the aortic valve
is inconclusive for BAV, card iac magnetic resonance,
cardiac CTA, and TEE can be used to better visualizethe aortic valve and thereby diagnose BAV.
2. Cardiac-gated CT or MRI provides superior images of
the aortic root and ascending aorta when TTE is inade-quate to visualize the full extent of the proximal aorta.The choice between CT or MRI depends on patient
characteristics, institutional expertise, renal function,
affordability, and radiation exposure concerns.
16
3. Certain types of HTAD have an increased prevalence of
BAV. For example, BAV is present in w10% of patients
with Loeys-Dietz syndrome (attributable to pathogenicvariants in TGFBR1 ,TGFBR2 ,SMAD3 ,TGFB2 ,a n d
TGFB3 ),
6and HTAD attributable to pathogenic variants
inNOTCH1 ,ACTA2 ,MAT2A ,SMAD6 ,a n d LOX also have
an increased prevalence of BAV.5,6Importantly, most
patients with BAV and TAAs who undergo genetictesting will not be found to have a pathologic geneticvariant, even when their condition is familial. Never-theless, when the condition is familial, a medicalgeneticist or specialist in genetic aortopathy shouldevaluate, counsel, and genetically test patients withBAV and aortopathy.
17Recommendations for BAV Aortopathy
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In patients with a BAV, TTE is indicated to evalu ate valve morphology and function, to evaluate the
diameter of the aortic root and ascending aorta, an d to evaluate for aortic coarctation and other
associated cardiovascular defects.1-4
1 C-LD2. In patients with a BAV, CT or MRI of the thoracic aorta is indicated when the diameter and morphology of
the aortic root, ascending aorta, or both cannot be assessed accurately or completely by TTE.1
1 C-LD3. In patients with a BAV and either HTAD or phenotypic features concerning for Loeys-Dietz syndrome, a
medical genetics evaluation is recommended.5,6
1 C-LD4. In patients with a BAV and a dilated aortic root or ascending aorta, screening of all ﬁrst-degree relatives
by TTE is recommended to evaluate for the presence o f a BAV, dilation of the aortic root and ascending
aorta, or both; if the diameter and morphology of the aortic root, ascending aorta, or both cannot be
assessed accurately or completely by TTE, a cardiac- gated CT or MRI of the thoracic aorta is indicated.7
2a B-NR5. In patients with a BAV, screening of all ﬁrst-degree relatives by TTE is reasonable to evaluate for the
presence of a BAV, dilation of the aortic root and ascending aorta, or both.7-10Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e268

4. Both BAV and aortic root an d ascending aortic dilation
may be familial,7and the inheritance patterns for fa-
milial BAV and aortopathy are consistent with anautosomal dominant pattern with incomplete pene-trance.
8-10In families with BAV and aortic root and
ascending aortic dilation, obligate carriers may have
BAV, aortic dilation, both, or neither.7In families with
BAV and aortic root and asc ending aortic dilation,
screening of the ﬁrst-degree relatives (parents, sib-
lings, and children) with TTE to evaluate for BAV andaortic dilation identi ﬁes affected members. If a family
member is discovered to have a BAV, aortic dilation, orboth, cascade evaluation of other related family
members is then indicated. Because families with BAVand aortic dilation may have members with aortic root
and ascending aortic dilation in the absence of a BAV, ifthe ascending aorta is not adequately assessed by TTE,a CT or MRI should be performed to fully evaluate thesize of the ascending aorta.
5 .T h ep r e v a l e n c eo faB A Vi nt h er e l a t i v e so fap a t i e n t
with a BAV ranges from 9% to 20%.
8-10Family mem-
bers of individuals with a BAV may also have aorticdilation. A recent analysis found that TTE screening ofﬁrst-degree relatives of affected patients, to detect
both BAV and aortopathy, proves to be cost-effective.
18
6.1.3.1. Routine Follow-Up of BAV Disease Aortopathy
Recommendations for Routine Follow-Up of BAV Disease Aortopathy
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In patients with a BAV who have undergone previous aortic valve repair or replacement and have a
diameter of the aortic root, ascending aortic, or both of ‡4.0 cm, lifelong surveillance imaging of the
aortic root and ascending aorta by TTE, CT, or MRI is recommended at an interval dependent on aortic
diameter and rate of growth.1-3
1 C-LD2. In patients with a BAV and a diameter of the aortic root, ascending aorta, or both of ‡4.0 cm, lifelong
surveillance imaging of the aortic root and ascen ding aorta by TTE, CT, or MRI is recommended at an
interval dependent on aortic diameter and rate of growth.4,5
Synopsis
Patients with BAV, with or without aortic dilation,
require lifelong surveillance of the aortic root andascending aorta because of risk of late aortic growth. Thedegree of aortic dilation and the progression of aortopathy
may be greater in patients with aortic root phenotype and
those with predominant AR.
3,6Progressive aortic growth
may occur after AVR.3,7
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Patients with BAV who have undergone previous
isolated AVR or aortic valve repair remain at risk forfuture aortic dilation and dissection. In a series of
1,286 patients who underwent isolated AVR for BAV
from 1960 to 1995, the 15-year freedom from aorticevents (aortic dissection, aortic aneurysm of >5.0 cm,
or aortic aneurysm surgery) was 89% but was lowerfor those with documented aortic dilation at baselinec o m p a r e dw i t ht h o s ew i t hn o r m a ld i a m e t e r s( 8 5 %versus 93%; P¼0.001).
8Patients with BAV who have
undergone isolated AVR for aortic stenosis and have
only mild-to-moderate aortic dilation are at low risk
for adverse aortic events at 15-year follow-up,3,9
whereas those who underwe nt AVR for predominantAR and those with predominant dilation of the aortic
root ( “root phenotype ”) are at higher risk for adverse
aortic events during follow-up. Among 56 patientswith BAV who underwent isolated AVR for AR andhad concomitant aortic root dilation (4.0 –5.0 cm),
adverse aortic events occurred in 34% of patients
during follow-up.
4Patients with BAV who undergo
isolated AVR for AR are at higher risk for late aorticdissection than patients who underwent AVR foraortic stenosis.
10
2. In a prospective study of 90 adults with BAV, the mean
increase in ascending aortic diameter was 0.47 mm/y(range, 0.2 –2.3 mm/y) over a 4.8-year follow-up.
11Sur-
veillance imaging can document current aortic di-
ameters and permit calculation of aortic growth rates.2,6
Among a cohort of adult pat ients with BAV (mean age,
55/C617 years) without a TAA at baseline (ie, the baseline
aortic diameter was <4.5 cm), 13% went on to develop a
TAA at 14 /C66 years after diagnosis, and the 25-year risk
of TAA was 26%.12For many adults, an aortic root,
ascending aortic, or both diameter $4.0 cm is consid-
ered dilated and should therefore be monitored over
time with surveillance imaging to detect progressivedilation.JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee269

6.1.3.2. BAV Aortopathy Interventions: Replacement of the
Aorta in Patients With BAV
Synopsis
The timing of surgery to replace the aorta in BAV dis-
ease depends on the morphology and diameter of theaorta, aortic valve function, rate of aortic growth, familyhistory, patient characteris t i c s ,p a t i e n tw i s h e s ,a n dt h e
expertise of the surgeon and institution.
1,7
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Patients with a BAV without signi ﬁcant aortic dilation
are at low risk for type A aortic dissection,3,8whereas
those patients with BAV and aneurysmal dilation of theaortic root, ascending aorta, or both have a signi ﬁ-
cantly increased risk of aortic dissection.
5,8The risk of
aortic dissection rises with i ncreasing aortic diameter,
and there are “hinge points ”when the ascending aorta
reaches diameters >5.25 cm to 5.75 cm.9
2. Indexing the maximal aortic root or ascending aortic
diameter to height is predicti ve of aortic dissection risk
and therefore informs surgical thresholds.3,4Moreover,
when comparing long-term outcomes in patients withBAV and aortic root or ascending aortic dilation, sur-vival was signi ﬁcantly better for those with an aortic
cross-sectional area (in cm
2)t oh e i g h t( i nm e t e r s )r a t i o
of$10 who underwent electi ve prophylactic aortic
repair compared with those who did not undergo
elective repair.33. There are additional risk factors for aortic
dissection that may inform aortic surgical thresholdsin patients with a BAV. A family history of aorticdissection
10and rapid aortic growth of $0.3 cm/y
(when measured similarly with same technique)are both risk factors for aortic dissection. Patientswith BAV and aortic coarctation have been reportedto be at increased risk of aortic dissection,
11although
in a recent report of 499 patients with BAV (mean
age, 40 /C616 years), of whom 24% also had aortic
coarctation, there was no difference in adverse aorticevents between those with or without coarctation.
12
Patients with dilation of the aortic root ( “root
phenotype ”) represent 10% to 20% of patients
with BAV and aortopathy and may have more rapidaortic growth and an increased risk of aortic
complications.
13,14Because surgical aortic root
replacement (and VSRR) is more complex thanascending aortic replacement, shared decision-making is often used when evaluating the risks andbene ﬁts of elective aortic root replacement at aortic
diameters <5.5 cm.
1,2,5,6
4. In patients with a BAV and indications for aortic valve
intervention for stenosis or r egurgitation, the data are
limited regarding the degree of aortic dilation that
warrants replacement of the aortic root, ascendingRecommendations for BAV Aortopathy Intervention s: Replacement of the Aorta in Patients With BAV
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In patients with a BAV and a diameter of the aortic root, ascending aorta, or both of ‡5.5 cm, surgery to
replace the aortic root, ascendi ng aorta, or both is recommended.1-3
2a B-NR2. In patients with a BAV and a cross-secti onal aortic root or ascending aortic area (cm2)t oh e i g h t( m )r a t i o
of‡10 cm2/m, surgery to replace the aortic root, ascendi ng aorta, or both is reasonable, when performed
by experienced surgeons in a Multidisciplinary Aortic Team.3,4
2a B-NR3. In patients with a BAV, a diameter of the aortic root or ascending aorta of 5.0 cm to 5.4 cm, and an
additional risk factor f or aortic dissection ( Table 14 ), surgery to replace the aortic root, ascending aorta,
or both is reasonable, when performed by experience d surgeons in a Multidisciplinary Aortic Team.1,5
2a B-NR4. In patients with a BAV who are undergoing surgical aortic valve repair or replacement, and who have a
diameter of the aortic root or ascending aorta of ‡4.5 cm, concomitant replacement of the aortic root,
ascending aorta, or both is reasonable, when performed by experienced surgeons in a MultidisciplinaryAortic Team.
1,6
2b B-NR5. In patients with a BAV, a diameter of the aortic root or ascending aorta of 5.0 cm to 5.4 cm, no other risk
factors for aortic dissection ( Table 14 ), and at low surgical risk, surgery to replace the aortic root,
ascending aorta, or both may be reasonable, when p erformed by experienced surgeons in a Multidisci-
plinary Aortic Team.1,2,5Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e270

aorta, or both at the time of AVR. Patients with a long
life expectancy, low surgical risk, or with the root
phenotype and predominant AR may bene ﬁtf r o m
concomitant prophylactic aortic repair. Conversely, forpatients at higher surgical risk, especially those withaortic stenosis and only moderate ascending aortic
dilation, the risks of conco mitant aortic repair may not
be warranted.
5. Limited data are available on the risk of aortic dissec-
tion among those with a BAV and aortic aneurysm
diameter of 5.0 cm to 5.4 cm.
5,15Patient-related char-
acteristics and surgical expertise may inform thetiming of surgery, especially in low-risk patients withBAV and aortic aneurysms of 5.0 cm to 5.4 cm.
1,2,5,6
6.2. AAA: Cause, Risk Factors, and ScreeningTABLE 14 Risk Factors for Aortic Dissection
Family history of aortic dissection
Aortic growth rate $0.3 cm/y
Aortic coarctation“Root phenotype ”aortopathy
Recommendations for AAA: Cause, Risk Factors, and Screening
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-R1. In men who are ‡65 years of age who have ever smoked, ultrasound screening for detection of AAA is
recommended.1
1 C-LD2. In men or women who are ‡65 years of age and who are ﬁrst-degree relatives of patients with AAA,
ultrasound screening for detection of AAA is recommended.2,3
2a C-EO3. In women who are ‡65 years of age who have ever smoked, ultr asound screening for detection of AAA is
reasonable.4,5
2b C-LD4. In men or women <65 years of age and who have multiple risk factors ( Table 15 )o ra ﬁrst-degree relative
with AAA, ultrasound screening for AAA may be considered.5,6
3: No Bene ﬁt B-NR5. In asymptomatic men or women >75 years who have had a negative initial ultrasound screen, repeat
screening for detection of AAA is not recommended.1
Synopsis
Although AAA share risk factors with typical athero-
sclerosis, AAA are histopathologically distinct and char-acterized by medial degeneration of the aortic wall.
7Most
AAA develop an intraluminal thrombus that contributes to
ongoing wall degradation via oxidative stress, smooth
muscle cell apoptosis, proteo lysis of the extracellular
matrix, and adventitial in ﬂammation.8Ac o m p l e xi n t e r -
play of hereditary and environmental risk factors con-tributes to AAA, most notably older age, male sex,smoking, and a positive family history ( Table 15 ).
2,3,9-12
Lifetime risk for AAA is 8.2% in men and 10.5% in cur-
rent smokers.11At least 10% to 25% of patients with AAA
have a family member with the same condition,2and AAA
may occur concomitantly with thoracic aortic aneurysmaldisease, especially in some genetic aortopathies.
11In-
ﬂammatory aortitis is a rare cause of AAA13,14(Section 9.1 ,
“Inﬂammatory Aortitis –Diagnosis and Treatment ofTakayasu Arteritis and Giant Cell Arteritis (GCA) ”). The
growth of AAA is nonlinear, with a mean rate of 2.6 mm/yfor AAA <5.0 cm,
15and may accelerate in the setting of
smoking or a family history of AAA,16,17and smoking may
h a v eag r e a t e ri m p a c to ng r o w t hi nw o m e nt h a ni nm e n .4
Ultrasound screening should be targeted toward those atthe greatest risk for AAA and growth ( Figure 19 ), with the
goal of preventing rupture and associated mortality.
1,5,6
Recommendation-Speci ﬁcS u p p o r t i v eT e x t
1 . O l d e ra g e ,m a l es e x ,a n ds m o k i n ga r ei n d e p e n d e n t ,
strong risk factors for the development of AAA.9-11
Smoking history is de ﬁned as lifetime use of $100 cig-
arettes, but risk attributable to smoking varies signi ﬁ-
cantly depending on use, with lowest risk of AAA inthose who have lower versus higher pack-year history.
9
Based on a meta-analysis of randomized clinical trialsinclusive of nearly 125,000 mostly male patients,JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee271

screening of men $65 years of age reduced long-term
AAA-related mortality (4 RCTs: OR, 0.65; 95% CI,0.57 –0.74) and AAA-related ruptures (4 RCTs: OR, 0.62;
95% CI, 0.55 –0 . 7 0 )o v e r1 2t o1 5y e a r s .
1In a recent
population-based study ( of both men and women) in
the United Kingdom, two-thirds of the acute AAAevents occurred in those $75 years of age; conse-
quently, screening to elderly patients should be
offered, provided they would bene ﬁtf r o mp o t e n t i a l
aortic repair.
182. Having a ﬁrst-degree relative with AAA is a well-known
and well-established risk factor for development ofAAA.
2,3Small cohort studies of ultrasound screening in
relatives of those with AAA have identi ﬁed an overall
prevalence of new AAA of 10% to 20%, with the highestprevalence of 25% found among brothers. Indeed, theoverall lifetime prevalence of AAA is estimated to be32% in brothers of those with AAA,
2suggesting the
need for a targeted and individualized screening
approach for those who already meet age criteriawithin families.
3. Select women may be at risk for AAA and related
complications.
5Randomized trials and large observa-
tional studies that evaluate outcomes of screening forAAA by ultrasound in women are lacking, as female sexhas not been proven an independent risk factor for
AAA,
11and overall prevalence of AAA in women is
lower than in men. However, the risk of AAA may bepotentiated by smoking in women; in 1 study, smokingw a sa s s o c i a t e dw i t ha1 5 - f o l di n c r e a s e dr i s ko fA A Aamong women (relative risk, 15.0; 95% CI, 13.2-17.0)versus 7-fold among men (relative risk, 7.3; 95% CI,FIGURE 19 Algorithm for Identifying Patients to Screen for Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm
Colors correspond to Class of Recommendations in Table 2 . AAA indicates abdominal aortic aneurysm.
TABLE 15 Risk Factors for Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm
Strong Risk Factors Additional Risk Factors
Smoking history Hypertension
Older age HyperlipidemiaMale sex White raceFamily history of abdominal aortic
aneurysmInherited vascular connective tissue
disorder
Atherosclerotic cardiovascular diseaseIsselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e272

6.4-8.2).4Practical implementation and outcomes of
screening in women remain uncertain and warrantfurther study.
4. Select patients <65 years of age may be at increased
risk of AAA rupture, and data suggest a signi ﬁcant
proportion of those undergoing repair for ruptured
AAA did not meet the standard criteria for screeningbased on age.
5,6In a large study from the National
Inpatient Sample, 10,603 of 25,777 patients with
ruptured AAA (24%) were <65 years of age.5Notably, in
patients <65 years, data are lacking on the mortality
bene ﬁt of AAA screening.
5. Some patients may develop AAA after the age of 75
years even if they had an initial negative screen be-
tween the ages of 65 and 75 years. Although somewhatlimited, data from cohort studies suggest long-termAAA-related mortality is low among patients with aninitial negative screening ultrasound who had a sub-sequent AAA detected on repeat screening after the ageof 75 years.
1However, select patients at low surgical
risk who may have had borderline enlarged abdominal
aorta measurements on initial screening and who have
signi ﬁcant AAA risk factors ( Table 15 )m a yb ec o n s i d -
ered for repeat screening on an individualized basis.
6.3. Growth and Natural History of Aortic Aneurysms
Aortic aneurysm growth and natural history is variable
and dependent on the underlying etiology, such as HTAD(eg, Marfan syndrome and Loeys-Dietz syndrome), BAV,or sporadic aortic disease without a known genetic basis.There is signi ﬁcant evidence that aortic diameter corre-
lates with aortic dissection, aortic rupture, and mortal-
ity.
1-3In patients with Marfan syndrome, the mean rate of
growth of the aortic root has been reported to be 0.26 cm/y (range, 0.13-0.35 cm/y), with a tendency for larger an-eurysms ( >6.0 cm) to grow faster (0.46 cm/y).
4Patients
with BAV have a slower rate of aortic growth, with a rootpredominant phenotype growing at 0.06 cm/y (0.6 mm/y)and the more common ascending aortic phenotype at 0.03
cm/y (0.3 mm/y).
5Moreover, among those with tricuspid
aortic valves and sporadic ascending aortic dilation, themean rate of growth is even slower, as low as 0.01 cm/y(0.1 mm/y).
6Aortic arch aneurysm growth has been re-
ported to be 0.25 cm/y.7The mean growth rate of
descending and TAAA has been reported to be 0.19 cm/y,with rates increasing as the diameter increases.
8The
mean rate of growth of AAA is 0.26 cm/y, with larger an-eurysms growing as fast as 0.5 cm/y.
9
6.4. Medical Management of Sporadic and Degenerative Aortic
Aneurysm Disease
The primary goals of medic al therapy in sporadic and
degenerative thoracic and abdominal aneurysmal diseaseare to reduce growth rates, the risk of aortic-relatedmortality, and the need for aortic repair; a secondarygoal is to decrease the risk of nonaortic cardiovascular
events, given the multiple shared risk factors between
aneurysmal and atherosclerotic disease.
1,2Lifestyle
modi ﬁcation, including smoking cessation and blood
pressure (BP) control, improves overall cardiovascularhealth and may be bene ﬁcial to patients with aortic
aneurysmal disease. Pharmacotherapy speci ﬁct ot h e
treatment of aortic disease includes the use of selectedantihypertensives (especially beta blockers and ARBs)
that may mitigate the proteolysis pathways, leading to
medial degeneration and reducing of sheer stress on thea o r t i cw a l l ,a sw e l la st h eu s eo fs t a t i n s ,w h i c hm a yt a r g e tinﬂammatory and atherosclerotic pathways.
3Outcomes
data from clinical trials of medical therapy in aortic an-eurysms broadly are limited, as most trials have focusedon cohorts of patients with either Marfan syndrome orAAA. Consequently, correlati ons may be imprecise when
applied to other populations.
6.4.1. Medical Therapy and Risk Factor Modi ﬁcation in
Sporadic TAA
6.4.1.1. BP Management in Sporadic TAA
Recommendations for BP Management in TAA
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In patients with TAA and an average systolic BP (SBP) of ‡130 mm Hg or an average diastolic BP (DBP)
of‡80 mm Hg, the use of antihypertensive medications is recommended to reduce risk of cardiovascular
events.1-3
2a C-LD2. In patients with TAA, regardless of cause and in the absence of contraindications, use of beta blockers to
achieve target BP goals is reasonable.1,4,5
2a C-EO3. In patients with TAA, regardless of etiology and i n the absence of contraindi cations, ARB therapy is a
reasonable adjunct to beta-blocker therapy to achieve target BP goals.6JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee273

Synopsis
The goal of BP control in TAA is to slow growth and
prevent aortic dissection, as well as to reduce nonaorticcardiovascular events, such as myocardial infarction andstroke. Uncontrolled hypertension increases the risk for
aortic dissection,
7so achieving a SBP goal of #130 mm Hg
and a DBP goal of #80 mm Hg, with the use of antihy-
pertensive therapy in those with hypertension and TAA,is advised. Although data are limited, achieving a moreintensive SBP goal of <120 mm Hg, if tolerated, may have
added bene ﬁt in selected patients and who are not un-
dergoing surgical repair.
4There has been signi ﬁcant
progress in understanding the molecular basis of aneu-
rysmal development and growth,8and a number of clin-
ical trials have explored the effects of beta-blocker andARB therapy.
9A summary of these trials speci ﬁct og e -
netic aortopathies is covered in detail in Section 6.1.2 ,
“Genetic Aortopathies. ”However, as the molecular
mechanisms of aneurysm formation may have similaritiesbetween aneurysm patients with and without Marfansyndrome, data from these studies may be extrapolated in
guiding the treatment of aortic disease of other causes.
Further clinical trial s are clearly needed.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. No randomized clinical trials have evaluated the
optimal threshold to which BP should be lowered inpatients with TAA to reduce the risk of aortic compli-cations (aortic growth, aortic dissection, or aortic
rupture). Updated hypertension guidelines from the
ACC and AHA suggest all patients with clinical cardio-vascular disease should have a target SBP <130 mm Hg,
DBP<80 mm Hg, or both.
1Evidence supports aggres-
sive BP lowering to reduce vascular-related adverseevents and all-cause mortality.
2,3Data from SPRINT
(Systolic Blood Pressure In tervention Trial) showed
that intensive BP control to a SBP <120 mm Hg, if
tolerated, reduced cardiovascular events by 25% and
all-cause mortality rate by 27% in patients withoutdiabetes over a median of 3.3 years, compared with a
control with a SBP target of <140 mm Hg.10,11
2. Prospective data on the positive effects of beta blockers
in TAA based on cause are limited, with the most robustevidence derived from cohort studies of those with
Marfan syndrome (see Section 6.1.2.2 ,“Marfan Syn-
drome ”). In a small, open-label, randomized clinical
trial of prophylactic pro pranolol (mean dose, 212 /C668
mg/d) versus placebo in adolescents and adults withMarfan syndrome, beta-adrenergic blocking drugsslowed aortic root growth and reduced aortic compli-cations.
5In a study of 155 children <12 years of age with
Marfan syndrome, beta blockers decreased the rate of
aortic root growth by 0.16 mm/y, on multivariate
analysis.4In the “2017 Hypertension Clinical Practice
Guideline, ”beta-blocker therapy is the recommended
ﬁrst-line antihypertensive drug therapy for patients
with hypertension and TAD.1
3. A meta-analysis of 1,510 randomized patients evalu-
ating the effect of ARBs on TAA associated with Marfansyndrome showed slower growth of the aortic root with
the use of ARBs compared with placebo; in a direct
comparison with beta-blocker therapy, there was nodifference in aortic growth; and the combination ofbeta blocker plus ARB led to slower aortic growth thanbeta blockers alone.
6In the Jikei Heart Study,12which
s u p p o r t e dt h eu s eo fA R B si nt h e2 0 1 0A C C / A H Athoracic aortic disease guidelines, Japanese patients onan antihypertensive drug regimen that included val-
sartan had a lower rate of adverse cardiovascular
events, including mortal ity and, in particular, a
reduction was showed in the incidence of aorticdissection. However, this study was subsequentlyretracted
13and, consequently, the LOE for use of ARBs
has been downgraded to C from B.
6.4.1.2. Treatment of TAA With Statins
Recommendations for Treatment of TAA With Statins
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
2a C-LD1. In patients with TAA and imaging or clinical evidenc e of atherosclerosis, statin therapy at moderate or
high intensity is reasonable.1,2
2b C-LD2. In patients with TAA who have no evidence of at herosclerosis, the use of statin therapy may be
considered.3-6Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e274

Synopsis
Clinical atherosclerotic car diovascular disease (ASCVD)
encompasses aortic aneurysms of atherosclerotic origin.For the purpose of this guideline, we also de ﬁne aortic
aneurysm with concomitant PAU or visualized atheroma
as atheromatous aortic dise ase, even in the presence of a
genetic syndrome, given some causes have shared riskfactors with ASCVD. Based on the AHA/ACC “2018
Guideline on the Management of Blood Cholesterol, ”
1a
high-intensity statin for >50% reduction in low-density
lipoprotein (LDL) for patients <75 years of age with clin-
ical atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease was recom-mended to prevent adverse events (eg, myocardial
infarction and stroke). If a high-intensity statin cannot
be used, a moderate-intensity statin can be initiated.
1
According to evidence from animal studies innonatherosclerotic-related TAA, statin therapy may pre-vent growth and adverse remodeling
7.H o w e v e r ,i t su s e
in clinical practice at this time is not fully understood.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Atherosclerotic aortic aneurysms increase risk of stroke
and myocardial infarction and thus are considered acoronary artery disease equ ivalent according to NCEP
ATP III (National Cholesterol Education Program AdultTreatment Panel III), with a >20% risk of an event
within 10 years.
8The “2016 AHA/ACC Guideline on the
Management of Patients With Lower Extremity Pe-ripheral Artery Disease ”
9gave a COR 2a recommenda-
tion for use of high-intensity statin in patients with
noncoronary atherosclerotic disease to achieve an LDLgoal of <70 mg/dL. From the Cholesterol Treatment
Trialists ’Collaboration, when combining data from 5RCTs of 39,612 patients over median 5.1 years, more
intensive cholesterol lowering in patients with ASCVDreduced major cardiovascular events by an additional15% beyond what was achieved with less intensivecholesterol lowering.
1,2In patients with sporadic or
genetically mediated aneurysms, if there is concomi-
tant atherosclerotic disease elsewhere, then statintherapy is still reasonable.
2. It has long been hypothesized that the pleiotropic ef-
fects of statins may be bene ﬁcial in preventing the
adverse vascular wall remodeling associated withTAAs, thereby slowing growt h, regardless of cause and
whether associated atheros clerosis is present. Animal
studies have shown a reduction in thoracic aneurysm
growth with statin therapy, possibly via regulation ofMMP activity.
7,10As t u d yo f1 , 3 4 8p a t i e n t sw i t h
thoracic aortic ectasia showed, in a propensity-matched analysis, a possible bene ﬁtw i t hs t a t i nt h e r -
apy in the reduction of aortic growth rate as well asaortic complications.
3,11In a retrospective study that
included 2,267 patients who underwent TEVAR for
aneurysmal disease, 1,148 (64%) of whom had been
treated with a statin preope ratively, preoperative
statin therapy was associated with signi ﬁcantly lower
perioperative complication rates and 5-year mortal-ity.
12A possible bene ﬁt of statins in prevention of
adverse aortic-related outcomes was also showed in asmall cohort study, and slowing of aortic growth issuggested by 2 small studies in patients with BAV and
aortopathy.
6,8
6.4.1.3. Smoking Cessation in TAA
Recommendation for Smoking Cessation in TAA
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
1 C-LD1. In patients with TAA who smoke cigarettes, smoking cessation efforts are recommended.1,2
Synopsis
Smoking cessation and avoidance of secondhand smoke
exposure is considered a healthy lifestyle modi ﬁcation in
patients with TAAs, regardless of cause. Many patientscared for in cardiovascular clinical practices have interest
in smoking cessation; thus, implementation of an effective
strategy using the 5 A ’s (Ask, Advise, Assess, Assist, and
Arrange) is worthwhile, along with a referral to dedicatedprograms, use of app-based tools, pharmacotherapy(which includes nicotine replacement, bupropion, or var-enicline), or both.
1-3Although the use of e-cigarettes hasbeen shown to be an effective strategy in smoking cessa-
tion,4the ef ﬁcacy and, importantly, safety of e-cigarette
use in patients with TAA is not well understood.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁcS u p p o r t i v eT e x t
1. There are many validated options for smoking cessation
for patients who continue to smoke and have TAA.1-3
Although no randomized clin ical trials have evaluated
t h ee f f e c to fs m o k i n gc e s s a t i o no no u t c o m e si nT A A ,smoking is a risk factor for TAA expansion and, amongthose with atherosclerotic aortic disease, smokingJACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee275

cessation reduces the rates of myocardial infarction
and death.5,6The use of e-cigarettes, although an
effective smoking cessation tool, has not been shown tobe safe when used in patients with vascular disease,including TAA; further, small studies suggest that the
ﬂavoring chemicals in e-cigarettes may have an adverseeffect on vascular endothelial function and relaxation
via nitric oxide and cyclic guanosine monophosphate-mediated signaling.
7,8
6.4.1.4. Antiplatelet Therapy in TAA
Recommendation for Antip latelet Therapy in TAA
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
2a C-EO1. In patients with atherosclerotic TAA and concomitan t aortic atheroma or PAU, the use of low-dose aspirin is
reasonable, unless contraindicated.1,2
Synopsis
Aortic aneurysms of atherosclerotic origin are consid-
ered a coronary artery disease equivalent according to theNCEP ATP III, with a >20% risk of an event within 10
years.
3The 2006 updated “AHA/ACC Guidelines for Sec-
ondary Prevention for Patients With Coronary and Other
Atherosclerotic Vascular Disease ”1recommend use of low-
dose aspirin (75 –162 mg/d) in patients with atherosclerotic
aortic disease. Even in the absence of TAA, this remainstrue in other atherosclerotic aortic diseases, such as high-grade atheroma, PAU, or both.Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. In the SPARC (Stroke Prevention: Assessment of Risk in
a Community) study, aortic atherosclerosis was associ-ated with coronary artery disease (OR, 2.99; 95% CI,1.47 –6.10; P¼0.003).
2In turn, in the presence of coro-
nary artery disease, aspiri n has long been recommended
to reduce the risk of cardiov ascular events, including
stroke, death caused by coro nary artery disease, and
myocardial infarction.1
6.4.2. Medical Therapy and Risk Factor Modi ﬁcation in AAA
6.4.2.1. BP Management in AAA
Recommendation for BP Management in AAA
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
1 B-NR1. In patients with AAA and an average SBP of ‡130 mm Hg, or an average DBP of ‡80 mm Hg, the use of
antihypertensive medication is recommended to reduce risk of cardiovascular events.1-3
Synopsis
Reducing cardiovascular events such as myocardial
infarction and stroke, as well as preventing aneurysmgrowth and rupture, are the main goals in antihyperten-sive therapy in AAA. Uncontrolled hypertension is a
known risk factor for aortic rupture and dissection;
therefore, achieving an SBP goal of <130 mm Hg, and a
DBP goal of <80 mm Hg with the use of antihypertensive
therapy in those with hypert ension and AAA can reduce
adverse clinical outcomes, and some patients may bene ﬁt
from more intensive lowering with an SBP goal of <120mm Hg.
4The most robust evidence of antihypertensive
therapy in AAA is for beta blockers and agents that alterthe renin angiotensin system; however, in prospectiveclinical trials in humans, no speci ﬁc agent has been proven
to inhibit AAA growth.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Updated hypertension guidelines from the ACC and
AHA suggest all patients with clinical cardiovasculardisease have a target SBP of <130 mm Hg and/or
DBP<80 mm Hg.
1Evidence supports aggressive BPIsselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e276

lowering to reduce vascular-related adverse events and
all-cause mortality.2,3A more intensive SBP goal
of<120 mm Hg, if tolerated, may have added bene ﬁti n
select patients without diabetes and who are not un-dergoing surgical aortic repair. However, data are
limited to the single randomized SPRINT,
4which
showed that intensive BP control to SBP <120 mm Hgreduced cardiovascular events by 25% and all-cause
m o r t a l i t yb y2 7 %i np a t i e n t sw i t h o u td i a b e t e so v e ramedian of 3.3 years, compa r e dw i t hac o n t r o lw i t ha n
SBP target of <140 mm Hg.
4,5
6.4.2.2. Treatment of AAA With Statins
Recommendations for Treatment of AAA With Statins
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In patients with AAA and evidence of aortic atheroscle rosis, statin therapy at moderate or high intensity is
recommended.1-3
2b C-LD2. In patients with AAA but no evidence of atherosclerosis, statin therapy may be considered.4,5
Synopsis
ASCVD includes noncoronary atherosclerotic disease
such as peripheral artery disease (PAD) and AAA.6For the
purpose of this guideline, we de ﬁne abdominal AAA of
atherosclerotic cause as those with visualized aortic wall
atheroma, penetrating aortic ulceration either within the
aneurysm or at another site along the aorta, or both, with alimitation being that many patients with geneticallymediated AAA (see Section 6.2 ,“AAA: Cause, Risk Factors
and Screening ”) may have concomitant ASCVD. The AHA/
ACC “2018 Guideline on the Management of Blood
Cholesterol, ”
9using evidence from the Cholesterol
Treatment Trialists ’Collaboration, recommended a high-
intensity statin or, in some cases, moderate-intensity, for
patients with clinical ASCVD. A 50% reduction in LDL forsuch patients <75 years of age can prevent adverse events,
such as myocardial infarction and stroke.
7Ongoing study
is needed to evaluate clinical outcomes of statin therapyin patients with nonatherosclerotic AAA.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. AAA of atherosclerotic cause is considered a coronary
artery disease equivalent, with a >20% risk of a car-
diovascular event within 10 years.
8Intensive choles-
terol lowering in patients with ASCVD reduces majorcardiovascular events by an additional 15% beyondwhat is achieved with less intensive cholesterollowering.
7,9From a large Danish case-control study,current, but not a history of previous, statin use was
associated with decreased 3 0-day mortality rates in
patients with ruptured AAA (46.1% versus 59.3%,respectively; adjusted mortality rate, 0.80; 95% CI,0.68-0.95).
10Retrospective data from 5,892 patients
enrolled in the EUROSTAR (E UROpean collaborators on
Stent-graft Techniques for abdominal aortic AneurysmRepair) registry showed improved survival over 5 yearsof follow-up associated with statin use (81% for statinusers versus 77% for nonusers; P¼0.005).
11Addition-
ally, in a large registry-based study of 37,950 patientsundergoing repair of AAAs, those not previously onstatin therapy who were started on statin before
discharge had improved 1- and 5-year survival
c o m p a r e dw i t ht h o s ew h or e m a i n e do f fs t a t i nt h e r a p y .
12
2. In a recent meta-analysis, in broad cohorts of patients
with AAA, statin therapy was associated with sloweraneurysm growth, reduced risk of rupture, and lower30-day mortality after aortic repair
4;b e c a u s ea t h e r o -
sclerosis is so prevalent among patients with AAA, itwas not possible to distinguish whether statin therapy
bene ﬁted those without atherosclerosis equally. The
mechanisms by which statins improve survival in AAAwarrant further study, as in 1 single prospective cohortstudy of patients undergoing long-term surveillance,statins had not been shown to slow the growth rate ofAAA or have direct effect on m atrix metalloproteinase-9
or interleukin-6 concentrations.
5JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee277

6.4.2.3. Smoking Cessation in AAA
Recommendation for Smoking Cessation in AAA
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
1 C-LD1. In patients with AAA who smoke cigarettes, smoking cessation efforts are recommended.1-4
Synopsis
Cigarette smoking is a major risk factor for the devel-
opment, growth, and complications of AAA (see Section
6.2,“AAA: Cause, Risk Factors, and Screening ”)a n di n -
creases the risk for adverse clinical outcomes in the peri-
operative setting for AAA repair. Healthy lifestyle
modi ﬁcations in ASCVD, such as atherosclerotic AAA and
PAU, include smoking cessation and avoidance ofsecondhand smoke. Effective strategies in those patientsmotivated to quit smoking use the 5 A ’s (Ask, Advise,
Assess, Assist, and Arrange) and may include dedicatedmultidisciplinary programs, app-based tools, or pharma-
cotherapy with nicotine replacement, bupropion, vareni-
cline, or all 3.
1-3Although e-cigarette use has been shown
to be an effective strategy in smoking cessation,4the ef-
ﬁcacy and safety of its use in patients with AAA has not
been shown.Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. No randomized clinical trials have assessed the effect of
smoking cessation on clinical outcomes in patients withAAA, given the inherent design limitations of such anintervention. Current guid elines and recommendations
that encourage counseling and pharmacological in-terventions in patients motivated to quit are derivedfrom the fact that cigarette smoking is considered the
largest modi ﬁable risk factor for AAA. The use of e-
cigarettes is effective in smoking cessation; however,given its association with adverse vascular remodeling,more evidence on its safety in patients with AAA isneeded.
6.4.2.4. Antithrombotic Therapy in AAA
Recommendation for Antit hrombotic Therapy in AAA
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
2b C-LD1. In patients with AAA with concomitant atherom a and/or PAU, the use of low-dose aspirin may be
considered, unless contraindicated.1
Synopsis
Atherosclerotic AAA are associated with a >20% risk of
cardiovascular events within 10 years, as they areconsidered a coronary artery d isease equivalent according
to the NCEP ATP III.
2To reduce risk of cardiovascular
events and mortality, aspirin at 75 mg to 162 mg daily for
secondary prevention has been incorporated into the 2006updated “AHA/ACC Guidelines for Secondary Prevention
for Patients With Coronary and Other AtheroscleroticVascular Disease. ”
3Most AAA contain an intraluminal
thrombus (see Section 6.2 ,“AAA: Cause, Risk Factors, and
Screening ”)m a d eu po fac o m p l e xm a t r i xo fp l a t e l e t s ,
inﬂammatory cells, and ﬁbrin, which contributes to
growth and progression, and th us antithrombotic therapy
has been hypothesized to have a potential bene ﬁt in AAA.
However, clinical outcomes data are limited, and furtherstudy of the ef ﬁcacy of antiplatelet therapy in AAA is
warranted.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Low-dose aspirin monotherapy in patients with non-
coronary atherosclerosis i s considered a treatment to
mitigate risk of cardiovascul ar events, including stroke,
death caused by coronary artery disease, and myocar-dial infarction.
3Data are limited on aortic-speci ﬁc
clinical outcomes in AAA. Use of low-dose aspirin hasbeen hypothesized to reduce growth and progression ofAAA attributable to the detrimental effects of plateletactivation within the intraluminal thrombus. In 1 small
cohort study, low-dose aspirin was associated with a
reduced AAA growth rate and need for aneurysm repairat diameters of 4.0 cm to 4.9 cm but not forIsselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e278

aneurysms <4.0 cm. However, evidence from the
Danish National Registry of Patients study of 4,010 age-and sex-matched subjects with AAA
1showed an
increased case-fatality rate associated with preadmis-sion aspirin use in ruptured AAA (66% in users versus
57% in nonusers; adjusted mortality rate ratio, 1.16;
95% CI, 1.06-1.27); there was no association betweenaspirin use and the risk of AAA rupture (adjusted OR,
0.97; 95% CI, 0.86 –1.08).
6.4.3. Surveillance for Medical Management
6.4.3.1. Surveillance of Thoracic Aortic Dilation and Aneurysm
Recommendations for Surveillance of Thoracic Aortic Dilation and Aneurysm
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 C-LD1. In patients with a dilated thoracic aorta, a TTE is recommended at the time of diagnosis to assess aortic
valve anatomy, aortic valve function, and thoracic aortic diameters.1-4
2a C-LD2. In patients with a dilated thoracic aorta, a CT or M R Ia tt h et i m eo fd i a g n o s i si sr e a s o n a b l et oa s s e s s
thoracic aortic anatomy and diameters.1,3,5-7
2a C-LD3. In patients with a dilated thoracic aorta, follow-u p imaging (with TTE, CT, or MRI, as appropriate based on
individual anatomy) in 6 to 12 months is reasonable to de termine the rate of aortic enlargement; if stable,
surveillance imaging every 6 to 24 months (depending on aortic diameter) is reasonable.1,3,4
Synopsis
In patients with TAD, a detailed baseline assessment of
all the segments of thoracic aorta, aortic valve anatomy,and aortic valve function is important. TTE, CT, and MRIare all commonly used for assessment of the thoracic
aorta.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. In patients with TAD not at surgical threshold, a detailed
assessment with a TTE to evaluate aortic valve anatomyand aortic valve function is important for establishing abaseline. TTE usually provides clear images of the aorticroot and ascending aorta, is safe and reproducible, and
can be used for longitudinal surveillance. In select pa-
tients with dif ﬁcult echocardiographic imaging win-
dows, a TEE is an alternative for evaluating aortic valveanatomy and aortic dimensions.
1-3
2. Cross-sectional imaging with CT or MRI has been
established as the gold standard for assessment of allsegments of thoracic aorta including arch branch ves-
sels.5,6Electrocardiographic-gated techniques mini-
mize motion artifact and thus allow precisemeasurement of aortic root and ascending aorticdimensions.
5,6
3. Patients with stable aortic dimensions can be
observed longitudinally with TTE, CT, or MRI. Thefrequency of surveillance imaging should be individ-ualized and informed by the aneurysm cause, aorticdiameter, historical rate of aortic growth, how closethe diameter is to the surgical threshold, and thepatient ’sa g e .
8,9In general, in patients with nonge-
n e t i ca n ds y n d r o m i cc a u s e s ,t h er a t eo fa o r t i cg r o w t h
is relatively slow, so the interval for surveillance
imaging may be increased.
6.4.3.2. Surveillance of Abdominal Aortic Dilation
and Aneurysm
Recommendations for Surveillance of Abdominal Aortic Dilation and Aneurysm
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In patients with an AAA of 3.0 cm to 3.9 cm, survei llance ultrasound is recommended every 3 years to
assess for interval change.1-8
1 B-NR2 .I nm e nw i t ha nA A Ao f4 . 0c mt o4 . 9c ma n di nw o m e nw i t ha nA A Ao f4 . 0c mt o4 . 4c m ,s u r v e i l l a n c e
ultrasound is recommended annually to assess for interval change.1-8
1 B-NR3 .I nm e nw i t ha nA A Ao f ‡5.0 cm and women with an AAA of ‡4.5 cm, surveillance ultrasound is recom-
mended every 6 months to assess for interval change.1-8JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee279

Synopsis
In patients with AAA, imaging assessment of the
abdominal aorta is important for establishing baselinediameter and determining the timing of surveillance im-aging. Ultrasound imaging has been the standard for
surveillance imaging of the abdominal aorta and is widely
used. CT provides superior visualization of the abdominalaorta and its branches and is therefore used for preoper-ative planning. MRI is a reasonable alternative to CT inselected patients. Figure 20 shows a proposed general
algorithm for surveillance imaging of AAA, recognizingthat surveillance intervals should be individualized.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Multiple studies have established that ultrasound
surveillance of AAAs helps to prevent rupture andmortality.
2-7,11The risk of rupture increases at an AAA
diameter of >5.5 cm for men and >5.0 cm for women;
accordingly, surveillance imaging should be morefrequent at larger AAA diameters that approach thesethresholds. Conversely, at AAA diameters of 3.0 cm to3.9 cm, longer surveillance imaging intervals have
been shown to be safe.
2. In patients with AAA of 4.0 cm to 4.9 cm, rates of aortic
growth are higher, so annual surveillance ultrasound isrecommended. Even shorter intervals are often used in
those who smoke, have diabetes, or both because of
their increased risk of growth.
3. Once the size of the AAA reaches $5.0 cm in men
and$4.5 cm in women, the screening interval is
shortened to every 6 months given the potential oflarger aneurysms to grow m ore rapidly and reach the
thresholds for intervention. CT provides superiorvisualization of the abdominal aorta and its branches
and is an excellent alternative when ultrasound is
inadequate. MRA is a reaso nable alternative to CT.
Non-IV contrast MRI techniques have also been shownto be useful in de ﬁning AAAs.
9,10
4. CT is generally preferred when an AAA reaches the
threshold for intervention, both to con ﬁrm aortic di-
ameters and to detail the anatomy of the aorta and itsbranches for preoperative planning.
FIGURE 20 The Frequency of Surveillance Imaging of Abdominal Aortic Aneurysms Based on Current Aortic Diameter
Color corresponds to Class of Recommendations in Table 2 .1 C-EO4. In patients with an AAA that is inadequately de ﬁned with ultrasound, surveillance CT is recommended.
2a C-LDIn such patients, when there is a contraindication to C T or to lower cumulative radiation risk, surveillance
MRI is reasonable.9,10
1 C-EO5. In patients with an AAA that meets criteria for repa ir, CT is recommended for preoperative planning.(Continued)Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e280

6.5. Surgical and Endovascular Management of
Aortic Aneurysms
Most patients with TAA and AAA are asymptomatic, so the
purpose of surgical or endovascular intervention is to
reduce the risk of adverse aortic events (ie, aortic
dissection, rupture, and aortic-related death). Conse-quently, determining the optimal timing of interventionrequires a careful anatomic assessment, followed byweighing the risk of future adverse aortic events againstthe risk of intervention.
The goal of open surgery is to replace the aneurysmal
aortic segment with a prosthetic graft anastomosed to
nonaneurysmal aortic tissues while maintaining criticalaortic branch vessels. Endovascular repair leveragescontiguous nonaneurysmal aortic or iliac segments forﬁxation of endovascular stent grafts to exclude blood ﬂowfrom the aneurysmal sac. To date, the FDA has approved
individual stent grafts for the treatment of aneurysmsinvolving the descending thoracic, juxtarenal, andinfrarenal aortic segments. Stent graft devices to addressthe ascending aorta, aortic arch, and thoracoabdominal
aorta are available under investigational use in the United
States, currently in physician- and industry-sponsoredclinical trials. Long-term studies have shown that use ofendovascular stent grafts out side of the anatomic criteria
tested in their pivotal trials is associated with increasedrisk of aneurysm sac enlargement, underscoring the needfor appropriate patient selection and for long-term sur-veillance after endovascular repair.
1
6.5.1. Surgery for Sporadic Aneurysms of the Aortic Root and
Ascending Aorta
Recommendations for Surgery for Sporadic Aneurysms of the Aortic Root and Ascending Aorta
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 C-LD1. In patients with aneurysms of the aortic root and asc ending aorta who have symptoms attributable to the
aneurysm, surgery is indicated.1,2
1 B-NR2. In asymptomatic patients with aneurysms of the aortic root or ascending aorta who have a maximum
diameter of ‡5.5 cm, surgery is indicated.3-9
1 C-LD3. In patients with an aneurysm of the aortic root or ascending aorta of <5.5 cm, whose growth rate
conﬁrmed by tomographic imaging is ‡0.3 cm/y in 2 consecutive years, or ‡0.5 cm in 1 year, surgery is
indicated.10-13
2a B-NR4. In asymptomatic patients with aneurysms of the aortic root or ascending aorta who have a maximum
diameter of ‡5.0 cm, surgery is reasonable when performed by experienced surgeons in a Multidisci-
plinary Aortic Team.14-17
2a B-NR5. In patients undergoing repair or replacement of a tr icuspid aortic valve who have a concomitant aneurysm
of the ascending aorta with a maximum diameter of $4.5 cm, ascending aortic replacement is reasonable
when performed by experienced surgeons in a Multidisciplinary Aortic Team.18-21
2a B-NRIn patients undergoing repair or replacement of a tric uspid aortic valve who have a concomitant aneurysm
of the ascending aorta with a maximum diameter of ‡5.0 cm, ascending aortic replacement is reason-
able.18-21
2b C-LDIn patients undergoing cardiac sur gery for indications other than aor tic valve repair or replacement who
have a concomitant aneurysm of ascending aorta with a maximum diameter of ‡5.0 cm, ascending aortic
replacement may be reasonable.18
2a C-LD6. In patients with a height >1 standard deviation above or below the mean who have an asymptomatic
aneurysm of the aortic root or ascending aorta and a m aximal cross-sectional aortic area/height ratio
of‡10 cm2/m, surgery is reasonable when performed by ex perienced surgeons in a Multidisciplinary
Aortic Team.14,15,22
2b C-LD7. In asymptomatic patients with aneurysms of the ao rtic root or ascending aorta who have either an ASI
of‡3.08 cm/m2or AHI of ‡3.21 cm/m, surgery may be reasonable when performed by experienced
surgeons in a Multidisciplinary Aortic Team.23JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee281

Synopsis
Elective surgery for aneurysms of the aortic root and
ascending aorta is ideally performed when the risk ofadverse events —dissection, rupture, or sudden death —
outweighs the risks of surgery. No prospective multi-
center observational studies have evaluated the myriad of
parameters (eg, aortic diameter, length, or area, alone orindexed to height or BSA, wall stress, shear stress) pro-posed for predicting the risk of aortic adverse events.From a purely mechanical perspective, aortic dissectionor rupture can be considered a failure event, where animbalance exists between st resses on the aneurysm wall
and the inherent strength of its tissue.
24Whether the
aortic dissection is precipitated by increased wall stress or
decreased wall strength, or a combination of both, is anarea of active research.
25-29Maximal aortic diameter has
logically been the primary crit erion for elective aneurysm
repair because, per LaPlace ’s law, wall stress increases
proportionally with aortic radius and inversely to thick-ness.
30The original natural hist ory studies examined the
risk of rupture or aortic dissection versus diameter and
the hinge point for dissection generated the 5.5-cm
threshold that has long governed clinical practice.7,8
Although a signi ﬁcant proportion of patients with type A
aortic dissection present with diameters <5.5 cm,31,32this
surgical threshold still effectively reduces adverseevents.
17,33
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Large aneurysms can compress nearby structures as
they expand, resulting in symptoms of chest or backpain. Alternatively, pain i s sometimes associated with
rapid aortic growth. Consequently, the appearance ofsuch symptoms raises concern for an increased risk ofaneurysm rupture,
1,2and surgical repair is therefore
indicated.
2. A maximum aortic diameter of $5.5 cm has been the
primary criterion for elective surgical repair of aneu-
rysms of the aortic root or ascending thoracic aorta,4,6
based on natural history studies that examined diam-
eter (without centerline analysis) at the time of adverseevent and an assumed operative mortality of <5%.
4,7-9
The mortality rate for elective surgery is low, whereas
the risk of adverse events is high when such surgery isrecommended but not performed because of patient
noncompliance or comorbidities.
33T h es a m e5 . 5 - c m
diameter threshold applies regardless of whether pa-tients have tricuspid or BAVs.
5
3. One meta-analysis and limited observational studies
have found ascending aortic aneurysm growth to beslower than previously reported, and frequently <0.5
mm/y, in patients with a tricuspid aortic valve andwithout a genetic aortic disorder.
11,12,17,34The meta-
analysis suggested that rapid aneurysm growth isassociated with an increased risk of rupture.12Because
of the inherent error in measurement as well as inter-observer variability, 1 mm to 2 mm growth per yearwould be dif ﬁcult to document consistently on sur-
veillance imaging. Discrepancies in measurement can
occur when comparing differ ent imaging modalities or
even when using the same modality when comparingimages obtained with and without contrast. Ideally,growth rates are most accurate when assessed usingcardiac-gated CT or MRI with centerline measurementtechniques.
35Conﬁrmed growth of $0.5 cm in 1 year
has been, and remains, an indication for surgery.3-6
Moreover, growth of even 0.3 cm in 1 year still sub-
stantially exceeds the expected growth rate for aneu-
rysms of the root and ascendi ng aorta, so if that rate of
growth rate is sustained for 2 consecutive years,intervention is also recommended.
13
4. The risk of aortic dissection or rupture correlates with
increasing aneurysm diameter,7,8,16a sd o e st h er a t eo f
aortic growth.12,36As such, aneurysms of $5.0 cm
would be expected to have a greater risk of complica-
tions or rapid growth than would smaller aneurysms.
Indeed, in a report by Paruchuri et al,37relative to a
control aortic diameter of #3.4 cm, a diameter of 4.0
cm to 4.4 cm conferred an 89-fold increased risk ofaortic dissection, and a diameter of $4.5 cm conferred
a 6,300-fold increased risk ( Figure 5 ). Consequently,
many experienced surgeons in a MultidisciplinaryAortic Team choose to operate selectively on patients
with aneurysms of 5.0 cm to 5.4 cm,
17provided the
patient ’ss u r g i c a lr i s ki sl o w ,38and they have had
excellent results14-16in doing so. However, there is an
ongoing prospective multicenter RCT of patients withascending TAAs of 5.0 cm to 5.4 cm that will compareoutcomes of early elective surgery vs. medical sur-veillance,
39the results of which could provide further
guidance.
5. For patients undergoing aortic valve surgery with
concomitant ascending aortic aneurysm of $4.5 cm,
guidelines have previous ly recommended simulta-
neous aortic replacement in those with BAV. On theother hand, in patients who have undergone valvesurgery without concomitant aortic aneurysm surgery,whether for an underlying bicuspid or tricuspid aorticvalve, the associated aneurysms have been shown to
grow slowly and have low rates of aortic complications
over time. Still, data have also shown the safety ofperforming concomitant aneurysm repair at a diameterof$4.5 cm by experienced surgeons working in a
Multidisciplinary Aortic Team.
16,18-21 ,40-43Neverthe-
less, until there are better predictors for aortic com-plications, in general it is reasonable in patientsundergoing aortic valve repair or replacement to offer
concomitant aneurysm surgery for those withIsselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e282

aneurysms of $5.0 cm, because of the faster rate of
growth and higher risk of aortic dissection. Aortic rootreplacement should be individualized based on thetype of aortic valve surgery (ie, valve repair with orwithout valve-sparing root versus valve replacement,
mechanical versus bioprosthetic root replacement),
patient condition, patient age, and comorbidities. Inthose undergoing cardiac surgery for indications otherthan aortic valve repair, concomitant prophylacticaortic replacement at a diameter of 5.0 cm may bereasonable, because it would provide a margin ofsafety against future aortic dissection, particularlybecause cardiac surgery itself becomes an additional
risk factor for subsequent aortic dissection.
6. Data from the IRAD showed that w60% of patients with
acute type A aortic dissection had maximal aortic di-ameters of <5.5 cm
32at presentation, a ﬁnding that has
been corroborated by others.31,44Conversely, most
patients with aneurysms <5.5 cm who are managed
medically do not suffer aortic dissection or rupture.Therefore, absolute aortic diameter is far from an ideal
predictor of risk. Parameters proposed to improve risk
prediction include the ratio of aortic diameter to eitherpatient height or BSA,
23the ratio of aortic area to
height,14,15the ascending aortic length (centerline,
from annulus to innominate artery takeoff),14,15,45-47
aortic stiffness, and peak aortic wall stress.25,48-50All
are retrospectively promising, but none has beenprospectively validated. A cross-sectional aortic area to
patient height ratio of $10 cm2/m was found to corre-
late with increased mortality among unoperated pa-tients with root or ascending aortic aneurysms andeither a tricuspid
15or BAV.14T h eu s eo ft h ec r o s s -
sectional aortic area to height ratio is most appro-
priate in patients whose height is >1s t a n d a r dd e v i a -
tion above or below the mean.
7. A single-center large database of TAA has grown
considerably and was reevaluated with indexing ofaortic diameter to BSA (ASI) or height (AHI), to improvethe prediction of adverse aortic events.
23Height was
preferred because the variable nature of weight and the
underlying genetic contribu tion to height. Recommen-
dations for prophylactic repair at aortic diametersof<5.5 cm have been proposed but not systematically
tested in large-scale multicenter trials. Experiencedsurgeons in a Multidisciplinary Aortic Team
38may
consider the use of such ratios when determining theoptimal timing of intervention. This may be particularuseful for female patients, bu tm o r es t u d i e sa r er e q u i r e d
to further evaluate surgical thresholds in women with
aneurysms of the aortic root or ascending aorta.
6.5.1.1. Surgical Approach for Patients With Sporadic
Aneurysms of the Aortic Root and Ascending Aorta
Meeting Criteria for Surgery
Recommendations for Surgical Approach for Patients With Sporadic Aneurysms of the Aortic Root and
Ascending Aorta Meeting Criteria for Surgery
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In patients with an aneurysm isolated to the ascending aorta who meet criteria for surgery, aneurysm
resection and replacement with an interposition graft should be performed.1,2
1 B-NR2. In patients undergoing aortic valve repair or repla cement with a concomitant as cending aortic aneurysm,
a separate aortic valve inte rvention and ascending aort ic graft is recommended.3-6
1 B-NR3. In patients undergoing aortic root replacement w ith an aortic valve that is unsuitable for sparing or
repair, a mechanical or biological valved c onduit aortic root replacement is indicated.1,2,7,8
2a B-NR4. In patients undergoing aortic root replacement, valv e-sparing aortic root replacement is reasonable if the
aortic valve is suitable for sparing or repair and wh en performed by experienced surgeons in a Multi-
disciplinary Aortic Team.9-21JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee283

Synopsis
The goal of prophylactic repair of aneurysms of the
aortic root and ascending aorta is to prevent life-threatening complications from acute aortic events suchas aortic dissection, aortic rupture, or sudden death. This
goal is best achieved when the risk of future adverse
aortic events is greater than the expected surgical mor-tality (considering both the surgeon ’s and institutional
experience). The STS database has clearly shown thatproximal thoracic aortic surgery has a lower operativemortality when performed electively rather than emer-gently (2.2% versus 17.2%, respectively).
1
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Proximal thoracic aortic operations in the United
States, including ascending thoracic aortic replace-ment and aortic root replacement, have an overallelective mortality rate of 2.2%. Consequently, patientswho meet criteria for aneurysm repair and have lowoperative risk can undergo prophylactic resection andgraft placement with low operative mortality risk.
1
Similar results were obtained when examining theNationwide Inpatient Sample in which operative mor-tality rate for proximal thoracic aortic surgery was2.5%.
2
2. Single-institution studies have shown that the addition
of ascending TAA repair to AVR does not increaseoperative mortality in experienced aortic centers.
22-24
However, such results may not be reproducible at
low-volume centers that have a higher operative mor-
tality rate for isolated proximal thoracic aortic sur-gery.
1,2Root-sparing AVR with concomitant ascendinganeurysm repair is acceptable, because data suggest
the aortic root dilates at a slower rate than does theascending aorta, and studies of root-sparing surgeryhave shown no increase in long-term adverse aorticevents.
3-6,25
3. Surgical approaches to repl ace the aortic root should be
guided by the aortic valve anatomy. If the aortic valveis unsuitable for sparing or repair (eg, large fenestra-tions, calci ﬁcation), a mechanical- or biological-valved
conduit aortic root replacement should be performedbecause, when elective, this procedure has an opera-tive mortality rate of 2.2% in the United States based onthe STS database.
2,26Single-institution series from
centers with Multidisciplinary Aortic Teams have also
shown excellent results both with and withoutconcomitant hemiarch replacement.
7Long-term out-
comes are similar with mechanical- versus biological-valved conduit aortic root replacements, even inpatients <70 years old.
8
4. In younger patients with an aortic valve that is
amenable to sparing or repair, elective valve- sparing
aortic root replacement has been performed safely by
experienced surgeons in a Multidisciplinary AorticTeam.
9-11,21In patients with aortic root aneurysms
without an underlying genet ic disorder, valve-sparing
aortic root replacement has been performed by eitherthe reimplantation or remodeling technique withcomparable survival and valve durability.
12
6.5.2. Aortic Arch Aneurysms
Recommendations for Aortic Arch Aneurysms
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 C-EO1. In patients with an aortic arch aneurysm who have s ymptoms attributable to the aneurysm and are at low
or intermediate operative risk, open su rgical replacement is recommended.
2a B-NR2. In patients with an isolated aortic arch aneurysm who are asymptomatic and have a low operative risk,
open surgical replacement at an arch diameter of ‡5.5 cm is reasonable.1-3
2a C-LD3. In patients undergoing open surgical repair of an as cending aortic aneurysm, if the aneurysmal disease
extends into the proximal aortic arch, it is reasonable to extend the repair with a hemiarchreplacement.
4,5
2b C-LD4. In patients undergoing open surgical repair of an ao rtic arch aneurysm, if the aneurysmal disease extends
into the proximal descending thoracic aorta, an elephant trunk procedure may be considered.6,7
2b C-EO5. In patients with an aortic arch aneurysm who are asymptomatic but meet criteria for intervention, but
h a v eah i g hr i s kf r o mo p e ns u r g i c a lr e p a i r ,ah y b r i do re n d o v a s c u l a ra p p roach may be reasonable.Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e284

Synopsis
Aortic arch aneurysms are the least common of the
TAA, because <10% of aneurysms involve the arch only;
in most cases, arch aneurysms are associated with adja-cent pathology.
1Previous aortic dissection is the most
common cause of arch aneurysms; in a large meta-
analysis, only 28.3% of patients undergoing interventionon the arch had de novo aneurysmal disease, with theremainder resulting from acute or chronic aortic dissec-tion. The risk of dissection or rupture, as related to aorticdiameter, is presumed to be similar in the arch as in otherthoracic locations, although no large reports consider archdimensions alone. Additionally, because of the proximity
of the aortic arch to other thoracic structures, dilation
may result in symptoms before the diameter reaches athreshold typically considered for intervention. Inter-vention to treat arch aneurysms carries an increased riskgiven the need to manage the great vessels and protectthe brain. Various techniques have been developed,including the use of hypothermic circulatory arrest andspecialized branched grafts to aid in reconstruction.
Endovascular techniques also continue to evolve.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Because of the juxtaposition of the aortic arch to other
vascular structures, nerves, trachea, and the esoph-agus, symptoms may develop because of the mass ef-fect from encroachment on adjoining structures.Ortner ’ss y n d r o m ei su n i l a t e r a lh o a r s e n e s ss e c o n d a r y
to in ﬂammation or stretching of the left recurrent
laryngeal nerve.
8Dysphagia aortica can be caused by
extrinsic compression of th e esophagus by either fusi-
form or saccular aneurysms of the arch. Likewise,extrinsic compression of the trachea may result indyspnea, and compression of the innominate vein orsuperior vena cava may cause superior vena cavasyndrome. Nonspeci ﬁcs y m p t o m si n c l u d ec h e s tp a i no r
p r e s s u r e ,f a t i g u e ,a n dn e c k ,j a w ,o rb a c kp a i n .
2. Open replacement of the aortic arch requires the use of
cardiopulmonary bypass, hypothermia, and other ad-juncts for neurologic and systemic protection. Variousrandomized and nonrandomized trials have compareddifferent cannulation strategies (ie, axillary, femoral,innominate),
9-12levels of hypothermia, and variations
in cerebral perfusion (antegrade, select antegrade,
retrograde),13-15with no one technique dominating or
being shown conclusively to be superior to another.
3. When proximal aneurysmal aortic disease extends to
the level of the innominate artery or further into thearch, but not necessarily the whole arch, a hemiarchprocedure may be able to effectively address the distalpathology. Open distal anastomosis will require thesame adjuncts and approaches used in open arch
replacement (as describe d previously), includingneuroprotective strategies. Modi ﬁed approaches have
been described that eliminate the need for open repairwhereby the ascending aorta is replaced ﬁrst with a
trifurcated side-branch for debranching of the arch in asequential manner to a level that is accessible for
clamping; however, no studies have yet shown the
bene ﬁt of such an approach. Although it does add to
the cardiopulmonary bypass time and blood loss,
4,5the
addition of a hemiarch has been shown not to increasethe risk of the procedure. However, this noninferiorityis lost when the proximal arch is disease free, withexception of an underlying aortopathy in which thenormal-sized arch will predictively enlarge or dissect at
a later time; in this setting, a hemiarch is justi ﬁed.
16,17
4. The elephant trunk procedure, as originally described,
extends the aortic arch graft into the proximaldescending aorta, thereby facilitating the subsequentrepair of diseased descending thoracic aorta (by eitheropen repair or TEVAR).
18Either a traditional elephant
trunk (an extension graft anastomosed to the distal endof an aortic arch graft at the time of arch repair that
projects into the proximal descending aorta with a free
distal end) or a frozen elephant trunk (a combined openaortic arch graft with an extension endovascular stent-graft extending into the descending thoracic aorta totreat extensive TAD involving both arch and descendingsegments via a median sternotomy) can be used.
6,19
With adjunctive procedures (ie, debranching), the
distal anastomosis can be moved more proximally into
aortic zones 2 or 3 ( Figure 3 ), while still proceeding with
an elephant trunk and with the potential of decreasingmorbidity, but data are limited on the bene ﬁts of mov-
ing the anastomotic site. A qualifying factor forconsidering open versus frozen elephant trunk iswhether the primary distal seal will be achieved witht h ef r o z e ne l e p h a n tt r u n k .I nt h ea b s e n c eo fad i s t a lseal, the conventional approach would provide the
same considerations for the second-stage procedure.
5. Various hybrid and endovascular techniques have been
developed to address the aneurysmal arch in thesetting of a high-risk patient, including open extra-anatomical bypasses (eg, left carotid-to-left subcla-vian artery bypass) and endovascular approaches. TheN e x t - g e nF e n e s t r a t e dT E V A Rt r i a ls h o w e dt h ef e a s i -bility of proximal landing zone coverage, with most
endografts being placed in zones 0 or 1 ( Figure 3 ),
although a landing zone of <15 mm was associated with
an increased risk of a type I endoleak ( Figure 11 ).
20The
midterm follow-up showed 5-year survival of 71% withan aneurysm-related event-free survival of 77%. Themost frequent reason for reoperation was type Iaendoleak (5%).
21Nonrandomized comparisons of open
versus hybrid endovascular approaches have not
shown signi ﬁcant differences in outcomes.22-24JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee285

Complete endovascular approaches have been
described25,26and may be considered by those with
endovascular experience who have access to theappropriate devices, investi gational devices, or both.6.5.3. Descending TAA
6.5.3.1. Size Thresholds for Repair of Descending TAA
Recommendations for Size Thresholds for Repair of Descending TAA
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In patients with intact descending TAA, repair is recommended when the diameter is ‡5.5 cm.1,2
2b B-NR2. In patients with intact descendi ng TAA and risk factors for rupture ( Table 17 ), repair may be considered at
ad i a m e t e ro f <5.5 cm.2-6
2b B-NR3. In patients at increased risk for perioperative morbidity and mortality ( Table 18 ) ,i tm a yb er e a s o n a b l et o
increase the size threshold for surgery accordingly.7
Synopsis
The current aortic size threshold for repair of
descending TAA is primarily based on single-center serieswhere patients have been observed with surveillance im-
aging and clinical follow-up to determine the incidence of
aortic-related events and dea ths. Such series indicate that
ad e s c e n d i n ga o r t i cd i a m e t e ro f >6c mi sa s s o c i a t e dw i t h
an increased risk of adverse aortic events and mortality,
1,2
as shown in Table 16 . Moreover, certain patient and
aneurysm features are associated with an increased riskf o ra o r t i cd i s s e c t i o no rr u p t u r e ,a ss h o w ni n Table 17 ,
which may prompt consideration of earlier surgery.
Conversely, some patients are at increased risk of peri-
operative morbidity or mortality, in which case the sizethreshold for aortic repair might be increased. Speci ﬁcally,
if the patient does not have ideal anatomy for endovas-cular repair, or has otherwise increased risk for contem-plated open repair, close monitoring until a higher surgicalthreshold is reached would be justi ﬁed. Advanced age,
8
preoperative renal insuf ﬁciency or hemodialysis, chronic
obstructive pulmonary dise ase, and previous stroke are
harbingers of adverse outcome s or perioperative mortality
after open repair ( Table 18 ).9Markers of frailty, pulmonary
disease, thoracoabdominal extent, need for iliac access,and zone 1/2 deployment were associated with majoradverse events after TEVAR ( Table 18 ).
7An u a n c e d
approach and detailed discussion with the patient canhelp guide the most reasonable treatment plan, weighing
the risks of the operation against the risks of continued
surveillance.Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. There is an increased incidence of aortic-related events
such as rupture or dissection with aortic diameters >6
cm, justifying intervention when the diameter is $5.5
cm in size.
1,2
2. High-risk features of rupture have been previously
identi ﬁed, supporting repair at a smaller diameter
threshold when these criteria are met. Features
including rapid aortic growth ( $0.5 cm/y),3symptom-
atic aneurysms,4underlying connective tissue disorder
or HTAD,2saccular aneurysm morphology,5female
sex,2a n di n f e c t e da n e u r y s m6have all been associated
with a higher tendency for rupture.
3. In patients being considered for open or endovascular
repair, high-risk clinical features ( Table 18 )h a v eb e e n
identi ﬁed that portend poor outcomes after repair.
For open surgical repair, advanced age,8preoperative
renal insuf ﬁciency of stage 3 or greater, chronic
obstructive pulmonary dise ase and forced expiratory
volume in 1 second #50% predicted, and previous
stroke9have all been associated with increased risk of
death, perioperative morbidity, or both. For endo-vascular repair of descending TAA, frailty indicators,p u l m o n a r yd i s e a s e ,a sw e l la sp r o c e d u r a lc o m p l e x i t y
are predictive of poor outcomes after TEVAR.
7When
contemplating either appro ach, special attention to
these risk factors will allo w appropriate c onsideration
of the risks to bene ﬁts in deciding on the merits of
intervention.Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e286

6.5.3.2. Endovascular Versus Open Repair of Descending TAATABLE 16Adverse Aortic Events at 1 Year, Based on
Baseline Aortic Diameter, Among Patients WithDescending TAA
Aortic Diameter
(cm)Deﬁnite Aortic Event *
(%)Probable Aortic Event †
(%)
5.0 5.5 8.0
5.5 7.2 11.2
6.0 9.3 15.6
7.0 15.4 28.1
Based on data from Kim JB, et al.1
*Deﬁnite aortic event includes aortic dissection or rupture con ﬁrmed with imaging or
intraoperative ﬁndings.
†Probable aortic event includes de ﬁnite aortic events as well as sudden unexplained
death.
TAA indicates thoracic aortic aneurysm.TABLE 17Risk Factors for Aortic Rupture Among Patients
With Descending TAA
High-Risk Features for Rupture
Aneurysm growth of $0.5 cm/y3
Symptomatic aneurysm4
Marfan, Loeys-Dietz, or vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, or HTAD
(see Section 6.1.2 ,“Genetic Aortopathies ”)2
Saccular aneurysm5
Female sex2
Infectious aneurysm6
HTAD indicates heritable thoracic aortic disease; and TAA, thoracic aortic aneurysm.
TABLE 18Patient Characteristics Associated With Increased P erioperative Morbidity and Mortality After Open and
Endovascular Repair of Descending TAA
Open Surgical Repair Endovascular Repair
Advanced age8Functional dependence
65-74 y (OR, 1.8; 95% CI, 1.4-2.4; P<0.001)
$75 y (OR, 2.6; 95% CI, 2.0-3.5; P<0.001)
Preoperative renal insuf ﬁciency (stage 3 or greater CKD) or hemodialysis Thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm extent
COPD and FEV1 #50% predicted Pulmonary disease
Previous stroke9Need for iliac access
Zone 1/2 landing for thoracic stent graft7
CKD indicates chronic kidney disease; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; FEV1, forced expiratory volume in 1 second; and TAA, thoracic ao rtic aneurysm.
Recommendations for Endovascular Versus Open Repair of Descending TAA
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In patients without Marfan syndrome, Loeys-Dietz s yndrome, or vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, who
have a descending TAA that meets criteria for interven tion and anatomy suitable for endovascular repair,
TEVAR is recommended over open surgery.1-4
1 B-NR2. In patients with a descending TAA that meets criteri a for repair with TEVAR, who have smaller or diseased
access vessels, considerations for alternative vascular access are recommended.5
2a B-NR3. In patients with a descending TAA that meets criteria for intervention, who have anatomy unsuitable for
endovascular repair, and who are without signi ﬁcant comorbidities and have a life expectancy of at least
10 years, open surgical repair is reasonable.6-9JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee287

Synopsis
Although no RCTs comparing TEVAR with open repair
of descending TAA exist, the pivotal device trials1,3,10
have shown a reduced perioperative morbidity,
increased clinical utility, and reduced follow-up aneu-
rysm-related mortality compared with open surgical
repair. However, reintervention after TEVAR is substan-tial.
11In addition, although clinical device trials showed
improved perioperative and long-term outcomes withTEVAR, Medicare claims data show that the perioperativeadvantage was lost within the ﬁrst year after intact
aneurysm repair, with a 5-year survival that was signi ﬁ-
cantly worse after TEVAR versus open repair, at 79%
versus 89%, respectively ( P<0.0001).
4Further study
should be dedicated to understanding why the bene ﬁt
from endovascular repair decays over time. In patientswith connective tissue disorders or HTAD, or those with alonger life expectancy, open su rgical repair is reasonable.
Open surgical repair of descending TAA re ﬂects a volume-
outcomes relationship: Although large institutional serieshave shown good outcomes with open repair,
6-9these
results are not replicable at lower volume centers.12The
decision to proceed with endovascular versus open repairbalances the need for appropriate anatomy and access, aswell as a higher reintervention rate for TEVAR versus thehigher perioperative risk associated with more de ﬁnitive
open surgical repair.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1 . T E V A Ri sa s s o c i a t e dw i t har e d u c e dp e r i o p e r a t i v e
morbidity, reduced hospita l length of stay, and better
freedom from aneurysm-related mortality compared toopen surgical repair, based on clinical device trialdata.
1,3,10In the study by Makaroun et al in 2008,13140
patients with fusiform aneurysms were treated withTEVAR and compared with 94 open surgical controls.At 5 years, there was a decreased aneurysm-related
mortality (2.8% versus 11.7%, respectively, P¼0.008),
a reduced major adverse event rate (57.9% versus78.7%, respectively, P¼0.01), and decreased major
aneurysm-related reintervention (3.6% versus 2.1%,respectively) in TEVAR versus open repair. In the studyby Matsumura et al
10, survival was noninferior for
TEVAR (98.1%) versus open surgery (94.3%) at 30 days,but the severe morbidity composite index, a marker for
postoperative complications, was lower for TEVAR
(0.2/C60.7 versus 0.7 /C61.2, respectively; P<0.01). In the
s t u d yb yF a i r m a ne ta l ,
11195 TEVAR patients were
compared with 189 open surgical controls, and the 30-day mortality rate was lower (2% versus 8%, respec-tively; P<0.01) and the major adverse event rate waslower (41% versus 84%, respectively; P<0.01) for
TEVAR; at 1 year, aneurysm-related mortality rate wasl o w e rf o rT E V A Rt h a nf o ro p e nr e p a i r( 3 . 1 %v e r s u s11.6%, respectively; P<0.002). However, in a registry
study using Medicare claims data,
4although short-
term outcomes were simi larly better with TEVAR
c o m p a r e dw i t ho p e nr e p a i r , that survival advantage
was no longer present at 1 year and, at 5 years, survivalwas signi ﬁcantly worse for TEVAR versus open repair
at 79% versus 89%, respectively ( P<0.0001). Overall,
the data show that TEVAR is bene ﬁcial in the short- to
intermediate-term in patients with appropriate anat-omy for endovascular repair, but the advantage is not
sustained over time.
2. Because of the relatively large delivery systems for
thoracic endografting, iliac artery graft conduits maybe required to ensure safe delivery of the endograftinto the aorta. In the clinical device trials, access ofvessels other than the femoral artery was required in9.4% to 21.1% of patients because of small or diseasedaccess vessels.
1-3In a multicenter cohort study from
the GREAT (Global Registry for Endovascular Aortic
Treatment) registry,5the overall access complication
rate was 2.8%, and women ha d a higher rate of access
complications than men (4.7% versus 1.8%, respec-tively; P¼0.013), with a higher rate of the need for iliac
a n da o r t i ca c c e s so rs u r g i c a lc o n d u i t ,a sw e l la sa c c e s svessel thrombosis irrespective of the clinical setting,type of aortic disease, and device sizing.
3. Open descending thoracic aortic repair can be per-
formed with low morbidity and mortality rates in high-volume centers.
6-8,14In a multicenter retrospective
study using the MEDPAR (Medicare Provider Analysisand Review) data,
15the overall mortality rate after
open surgical repair of descending TAA decreased inhigh-volume versus low-volume centers (11% versus15%; P<0.01). In addition, data using Medicare claims
show that the bene ﬁt of TEVAR is no longer present 1
year after endovascular therapy, with a signi ﬁcantly
worse 5-year survival compared with open repair (79%versus 89%; P<0.0001).
4In a recent retrospective,
single-center study in which propensity score matchinganalysis was used to compare the outcomes of openand endovascular descending and TAAA repair in 278pairs of patients,
16open repair resulted in better 10-
year survival than endova scular repair (52% versus
33%; P<0.0001). Because of the lack of available long-
term data on aortic-speci ﬁc mortality rate in young
patients after TEVAR, in pat ients deemed to have a life-
expectancy of $10 years, open surgical repair is
reasonable.Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e288

6.5.3.3. Left Subclavian Artery Management
Synopsis
Left subclavian artery coverage is required in up to
40% of cases of TEVAR of descending TAAs.4SCI and
stroke remain devastating complications associated withTEVAR. Addressing these modi ﬁable risk factors would
allow for better outcomes after this less invasive treat-
ment strategy. In addition, special considerations includethe prevention of vertebrobasilar insuf ﬁciency (particu-
larly among those with a dominant left vertebral artery),preservation of any preexis ting left internal mammary
artery coronary bypass graft, as well as left upper ex-tremity dialysis access or other left upper extremity-based graft. Currently, pivotal as well as feasibility trials
are ongoing for branched endografts intending to pre-
serve ﬂow to the left subclavian artery. Longer-term
follow-up of this technology is needed, but initial re-sults are promising.
5,6
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Up to 40% of patients undergoing TEVAR for thoracic
aneurysm repair require left subclavian arterycoverage. Preoperative left s ubclavian revasculariza-
tion has been shown to decrease the rates ofstroke
2,7,8and SCI.1,2Vertebrobasilar insuf ﬁciency
and left arm ischemia can also occur without leftsubclavian artery revascularization.
9,10Patients with
a patent left internal mammary artery to left anterior
descending artery coronary artery bypass graft, orwho are otherwise reliant on in ﬂow from the left
subclavian artery (eg, for dialysis access), shouldundergo left subclavian revascularization to preserveﬂow.
9
2. Patients undergoing TE VAR with left subclavian
coverage may not be hemodynamically stable enough
to undergo preemptive revascularization of the left
subclavian artery. If such patients go on to develop SCIafter TEVAR, there have been case reports of SCIreversal with secondary rev ascularization of the left
subclavian artery.
3
6.5.3.4. Celiac Artery ManagementRecommendations for Left Subclavian Artery Management
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In patients with descending TAA who undergo TEV AR with planned left subclavian artery coverage,
revascularization of the left subclavian artery befo re TEVAR is recommended to prevent spinal cord injury
(SCI)1,2and potentially to reduce stroke risk2and prevent other ischemic complications.
2b C-LD2. In patients with descending TAA who have undergone TEVAR with left subclavian coverage and develop
SCI that is unresponsive to an increase in BP or a cerebrospinal ﬂuid drain, left subclavian artery
revascularization may be considered.3
Synopsis
Celiac artery coverage is es timated to be necessary in
15% of patients undergoing TEVAR for descending TAArepair.
2The safety and use of this practice has previously
been shown with single-inst itution series citing lowincidence of postoperative visceral ischemia. However,
despite the preoperative ev aluation with CTA, angiog-
raphy, or both to con ﬁrm adequate collateralization be-
tween the celiac and superior mesenteric artery (SMA), asmall percentage of patients still die from visceralRecommendation for Celiac Artery Management
References that support the reco mmendation are included in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
2a B-NR1. In patients with descending TAA undergoing TEVAR in whom celiac artery coverage is being considered,
it is reasonable to ﬁrst con ﬁrm adequate collateralization.1JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee289

ischemia. In addition, late distal migration of the
endograft can encroach on the SMA, creating SMA ste-nosis and compromising ﬂow through the SMA and celiac-
based collaterals.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Migration of the endograft distally over time can cause
stenosis of the SMA and decrease ﬂow to the SMA and
celiac artery-based collaterals. In patients undergoingTEVAR with celiac artery c overage who have adequatecollateralization on CTA, angiography, or both, a small
percentage of patients go on to develop postoperativevisceral ischemia. Although the risk of visceralischemia after celiac artery coverage with TEVAR isrelatively low, there remains a ﬁnite risk (3.2% in
largest clinical series)
3for visceral ischemic complica-
tions, which can lead to death.
6.5.3.5. Ruptured Descending TAA
Recommendations for Ruptured Descending TAA
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In patients with ruptured descending TAA who are ana tomic candidates for endovascular repair, TEVAR is
recommended over open repair because of decreased perioperative death and morbidity.1-5
2b B-NR2. In patients with ruptured descending TAA undergoin g TEVAR, intentional coverage of the left subclavian
artery, celiac artery, or both may be considered to in crease the landing zone for endovascular repair.5-7
Synopsis
Ruptured TAA carry a high mortality rate. Single-center
data, meta-analyses, and clinical trials have all shown thelower rates of perioperative death and complicationsassociated with endovascular versus open surgical
repair.
1-5However, the survival advantage shown in
Medicare-based claims data disappears after 1.5 years,4
and single-institution series1,3reﬂect the frequent need
for reintervention over time. Furthermore, a meta-anal-ysis
2showed that aneurysm-related survival was
decreased in the TEVAR group over time, underscoring theimportance of continued surveillance in this high-riskpopulation.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. For repair of ruptured descending TAA, TEVAR is
associated with decreased perioperative morbidity andmortality compared with open repair. In 1 retrospectivemulti-institution study, TEVAR had a lower compositerate of death, stroke, and permanent paraplegiacompared with open surgery and a trend toward loweraneurysm-related mortality at 4 years.
1Similarly, a
meta-analysis showed that TEVAR was associated witha lower perioperative mortality and myocardial infarc-tion rate compared with open repair.
1A multicenter,
prospective clinical trial for aortic catastrophes —
including aortic rupture —showed that TEVAR was su-
perior with regard to the composite endpoint of mor-tality and paraplegia, compared with open repair.
5
Although the perioperative bene ﬁto fe n d o v a s c u l a r
repair of ruptured TAA was again corroborated in aMedicare-claims dataset, the survival advantage withTEVAR disappeared after 1.5 years.
4
2. When ruptured descending TAA present, coverage of
the left subclavian artery, celiac artery, or both may be
necessary to gain the necessary 2 cm of seal zone forsuccessful endovascular repair. Left subclavian arteryand celiac artery coverage during thoracic aorticrupture has been associated with reasonable technicalsuccess and outcomes in single-institution series
6and 1
clinical trial5in patients with acute rupture or compli-
cated dissection of the descending thoracic aorta.Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e290

6.5.3.6. Access Issues for TEVAR in Descending TAA
Synopsis
Iliac artery access for sten t-graft delivery systems is
marginal in up to 21% of cases in which TEVAR is per-formed for descending TAA.
1Careful review of the CTA of
the iliofemoral system is requ ired to ensure that marginal
or inadequate access is noted and properly managed.
Marginal access can be successfully circumvented using
surgical bypass, direct aortic or iliac exposure, or endo-vascular techniques to treat vessel stenosis. Percutaneousaccess was used successfully for endovascular abdominalaortic repair before it was applied to larger sheath de-vices. This technology has also been applied to TEVARwith a similarly high degree of success and reduced hos-pital length of stay.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Thoracic endovascular sten t grafts are housed in large
delivery systems, thus thorough review of theiliofemoral system is required to avoid access compli-c a t i o n s .I nt h ec l i n i c a ld e v i c et r i a l s ,a l t e r n a t i v ea c c e s swas required in 9.4% to 21.1% of patients because ofsmall or diseased access vessels.
6-82. Alternative access was required in up to 21.1% of pa-
tients undergoing TEVAR in the clinical device trials.8
Women have a higher incide nce of smaller diameter
external iliac arteries compared with men.1,2Direct
aortic or iliac artery exposure, iliac conduits, or endo-vascular techniques may be used to facilitate safe de-
livery of endografts during TEVAR.
1,2Preoperative case
planning will enable safe delivery of endograftswithout vascular complications.
3. Percutaneous access for delivery of TEVAR has been
performed safely and with a high degree of success,as shown in single-institution
4,5as well as multi-
institution registries.3Technical success ranged
from 94.4% to 98.9%, and percutaneous access was
associated with fewer complications and a shorter
length of stay compared with those with surgicalcutdown.
6.5.4. Thoracoabdominal Aortic Aneurysms
6.5.4.1. Size Thresholds for Open Surgical Repair of TAAARecommendations for Access Issues for TEVAR in Descending TAA
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In patients with descending TAA undergoing TEVAR, r eview of preoperative CTA of the iliofemoral vessels
should be performed to evaluate access.1,2
1 B-NR2. In patients with descending TAA undergoing TEVAR , if iliac access is marginal or inadequate to prevent
access-related complications, the use of alternative conduits is recommended.1,2
2a B-NR3. In patients with descending TAA undergoing TEV AR who have suitable anatomy, total percutaneous
femoral access is a reasonable alternative to open surgical cutdown to avoid access-relatedcomplications.
3-5
Recommendations for Size Thresholds for Open Surgical Repair of TAAA
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In patients with intact degenerative TAAA, repair is recommended when the diameter is ‡6.0 cm.1-3
2a B-NR2. In patients with intact degenerative TAAA, repair is reasonable when the diameter is ‡5.5 cm and the
repair is performed by experienced surge ons in a Multidisciplinary Aortic Team.1-3
2a B-NR3. In patients with intact degenerative TAAA who have features associated with an increased risk of rupture
(Table 19 ), repair is reasonable when the diameter is <5.5 cm.4JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee291

Synopsis
The data supporting aortic diameter thresholds for
either open or endovascular repair of TAAA are similar tothat presented for repair of descending TAA (see Section
6.5.3 ,“Descending Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms ”). All are
single-institution series with longitudinal follow-up viasurveillance imaging and detection of aortic-related
events and death. Intervention at diameters of <6.0 cm
would reduce aortic-related events and death. There arealso conditions in which intervention may be justi ﬁed at
smaller diameters (eg, rapid growth, symptoms, pene-trating ulcers, mycotic aneur ysms, connective tissue dis-
orders). Concerns for operative death in the setting ofcomorbid conditions is certainly justi ﬁed. However, in
centers with a Multidisciplinary Aortic Team, excellent
outcomes can be obtained despite the presence of such
conditions, and fatal aortic events may thus be avoided.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Aortic event rates begin to rise signi ﬁcantly, and 5-year
survival begins to fall when TAAA diameters are >6.0
cm. At this diameter, the risk of an adverse aortic eventranges from 9.3%
1to 19%,3which is 2 to 4 times the
median operative mortality rate for open TAAA repair.
In patients with multiple comorbidities known to sub-stantially increase the risk of open TAAA repair (eg,chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, advanced age,
preoperative renal dysfuncti on, preoperative left ven-
tricular dysfunction), it may be appropriate to continueto observe patients with TAAA diameters >6.0 cm or to
refer them for endovascular repair.
2. In centers with a Multidisciplinary Aortic Team,
despite the presence of comorbid conditions, excellentoutcomes can be achieved wit h meticulous periopera-
tive preparation and care as well as technically soundsurgery. On multivariable analysis, patients undergo-ing TAAA repair with a left ventricular ejectionfraction <40% were not more prone to operative death
(OR, 0.28; 95% CI, 0.02 –4.14; P¼0.58) or long-term
death (OR, 0.55; 95% CI, 0.17 –1.80; P¼0.23) than those
with higher ejection fractions.
5Similarly, carefully
selected octogenarians undergoing open TAAA repairhad a similar operative mortality rate as those <80
y e a r so fa g e( 5 . 2 %v e r s u s5 . 7 % ; P¼0.852).
6
3. Certain clinical factors associated with an increased
risk of TAAA rupture may prompt consideration ofopen or endovascular intervention at a diameter below
the standard surgical thresholds. In patients with intact
TAAA who are being observed with surveillance imag-ing, con ﬁrmed rapid aneurysm growth ( $0.5 cm/y)
would suggest the need for intervention regardless ofabsolute diameter.
4Symptoms consistent with an
enlarging TAAA that are not attributable to alternativepathology portend potential rupture and also suggestthe need for surgery.
7Patients with symptoms sec-
ondary to either PAU or saccular aneurysms are also at
a higher risk for rupture and should be considered forintervention regardless of absolute diameter.
8
6.5.4.2. Open Versus Endovascular Repair of TAAA
Recommendations for Open Versus Endovascular Repair of TAAA
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
Ruptured TAAA
1 B-NR1. In patients with ruptured TAAA requiring intervention, open repair is recommended.1-5
2b C-LD2. In patients with ruptured TAAA requiring intervent ion, provided that the patient is hemodynamically
stable, endovascular repair may be reasonable in centers with endovascular expertise and access to
appropriate endovascular stent grafts.6
Intact TAAA
1 C-LD3. In patients with Marfan syndrome, Loeys-Dietz synd rome, or vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome and intact
TAAA requiring intervention, open repair is recommended over endovascular repair.7-9
2b B-NR4. In patients with intact degenerative TAAA and suitable anatomy, endovascular repair with fenestrated
stent grafts, branched stent grafts, or both may be cons idered in centers with endovascular expertise and
access to appropriate endovascular stent grafts.10-13TABLE 19Features Associated With an Increased Risk of TAAA
Rupture
Rapid growth (con ﬁrmed increase in diameter of $0.5 cm/y)
Symptomatic aneurysm
Signiﬁcant change in aneurysm appearance
Saccular aneurysm or presence of penetrating atherosclerotic ulcers
TAAA indicates thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm.Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e292

Synopsis
There are no RCTs comparing early or late outcomes for
open versus endovascular repair for TAAA. As ofNovember 2022, there are no FDA-approved devices forendovascular TAAA repair. Most of the endovascular
procedures currently performed are done so with
customized fenestrated or branched endografts oninvestigational device exemption- or industry-sponsoredtrials. Although the number of endovascular repairs per-formed has been steadily incr easing, follow-up remains
limited, and open repair therefore remains the preferredtherapy for patients with TAAA who require intervention.The results for open repair are excellent in centers with a
Multidisciplinary Aortic Team. In the largest series pub-
lished to date, the operative mortality rate in 3,309 pa-tients undergoing open TAAA repair was 7.5%, including>1,000 patients undergoing repair of an extent II aneu-
rysm, with a low risk of aortic-related reintervention.Other high-volume centers have reported similar out-comes for open repair. In 1 center, the operative mortalityrate in 783 patients was 5.6%, with a low risk of SCI of
2.0% and need for postoperative hemodialysis of 5.2%.
Another center, whose operators used deep hypothermiccirculatory arrest, reported an operative mortality rate of6.8% with an SCI risk of <3% and postoperative hemodi-
alysis risk of 2.2%.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. In patients with ruptured TAAA, open repair can be
performed with low mortality by surgeons in centers
with a Multidisciplinary Aortic Team. In a series of 100consecutive patients with ruptured TAAA, an operativemortality rate of 14% and an SCI rate of 5% was ach-ieved.
5Although the study population was replete with
comorbid conditions, the only risk factor remainingsigni ﬁcant after propensity matching was “shock ”on
arrival to the hospital. Fur thermore, 5-year actuarial
survival was 47.5%. Centers experienced in complex
endovascular repair may opt to use this technique. In anational registry of 140 ruptured descending aneu-rysms, the operative mortal ity rate (10%) was good, but
there was a disappointingly high rate of stroke (14.7%),SCI (9.6%), and need for reintervention within 30 days(19.7%). At a median follow- up of 17 months, actuarial
5-year survival rate was 31.9%. These results were
similar to those reported from a device registry.
1,5
Although complex endovascular repair of intact TAAA
has shown promise in experienced hands and in selectcenters, in the setting of TAAA rupture, theendovascular approach is hampered by patient insta-
bility and the need for customized grafts (which maytake several weeks to manufacture). In addition, mostof the reported series of endovascular repair ofruptured TAAA are small; larger series with longer-
term follow-up will be neces sary to delineate the role
f o re n d o v a s c u l a rr e p a i ri nt h es e t t i n go fa o r t i cr u p t u r e .
2. Endovascular repair requires sequential steps for suc-
cessful stenting of side branches without the ability toachieve rapid control of hemorrhage. Therefore, therole of off-the-shelf branched repair has been limitedin patients with ruptured aneurysms and hemody-namic instability. However, in higher-risk patients who
present with symptomatic or contained ruptured an-
eurysms, are hemodynamically stable, and have suit-able anatomy, endovascular repair with an off-the-shelf or modi ﬁed device may be considered. Kolbel
et al
14reported a mortality rate of 15% for symptomatic
and 30% for ruptured TAAA treated by multibranchendovascular repair.
3. In patients with known or suspected connective tissue
disorders, such as Marfan syndrome, Loeys-Dietz syn-
drome, or vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, openrepair is recommended. Operative mortality rate isl o w e rt h a ni nt h eg e n e r a lp o p u l a t i o nu n d e r g o i n go p e nTAAA repair, as is the incidence of major complica-tions, such as stroke and SCI. Importantly, freedomfrom aortic reintervention is excellent, as is long-termsurvival. Conversely, da ta are lacking on complex
endovascular repair of TAAA for patients with con-
nective tissue disorders. A small study of 17 patientstreated by fenestrated-bra nched endovascular aortic
repair (FEVAR) had no mortality rate, 100% technicalsuccess, and 1 reintervention at mean follow-up of 34months.
6Endovascular repair may be reasonable in
patients who failed previous open repair or areconsidered high risk and have stent-grafts placed into
synthetic landing zones, or when used as a bridge to
open repair in patients with hemodynamic instability.
4. Single- and multi-institution series of physician-
sponsored investigational device exempt trials haveshown the promise of fenestrated and branchedendovascular stent grafts. When performed by experi-enced surgeons, technical success may be achieved in ahigh percentage of cases (92% –99.6%) with low peri-
operative mortality rate. At 1-year follow-up imaging,
branch vessel patency was also good (96% –98%) and,
at 3 years, freedom from aortic-related death was 91%and overall survival 57%.
15JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee293

6.5.4.3. TAAA Spinal Cord Protection
Synopsis
SCI is a devastating complication of open and endo-
vascular thoracoabdominal aneurysm repair, with anincidence rate of 2% to 15%, depending on aneurysmextent and cause, underlying patient comorbidities, ur-
gency of the procedure, and surgeon and center experi-
ence. Previous ACC/AHA guidelines did not address theissue other than to suggest higher-risk populations thatmight bene ﬁt from adjuncts to reduce the incidence of
SCI.
9The 2014 European guidelines assigned cerebrospi-
nalﬂuid drainage a I B recommendation to reduce the risk
of SCI.10However, data were limited at the time to sup-
port this recommendation, and an earlier RCT11had not
shown a bene ﬁt for cerebrospinal ﬂuid drainage in TAAA
repair. A more recent RCT did show a signi ﬁcant reduc-
tion in SCI for a cohort undergoing repair of extensiveTAAA (extent I and extent II) when cerebrospinal ﬂuid
drainage was used. Additional nonrandomized data sup-port this recommendation.
Delayed SCI may occur up to 2 weeks after surgery. This
complication has a profound impact on short- and long-
term outcomes.
10,12Early recognition and aggressive
management of SCI can lead to a return of lower extremityfunction. The reinsertion of a cerebrospinal ﬂuid drain is a
key component to salvage lower extremity function.Additional therapies, such as volume loading, increasingmean arterial pressure, and maximizing oxygen deliveryto the cord through transfusion or supplemental oxygen,are also critical.Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. TAAA repair remains a formidable undertaking regard-
less of whether open or endovascular repair is per-f o r m e d .S C I ,w i t he i t h e rp a r aparesis or paraplegia, may
be temporary or permanent and has a profoundlynegative impact on short- and long-term survival as wellas quality of life after repair. Many techniques have beensuggested to reduce the incidence of this signi ﬁcant
complication. Intraoperative management ranges from
deep hypothermic circulatory arrest to left heart bypassto a “clamp-and-sew ”technique, and support exists for
each approach. Similarly, intraoperative and post-operative spinal cord neuromonitoring is not wide-spread but has support that is institutionally based.Other interventions have b een also advocated as intra-
thecal papaverine to enhance spinal cord protection.
13
Cerebrospinal ﬂuid drainage remains the only tech-
nique proven to reduce the incidence of perioperativeSCI. In an RCT examining the incidence of SCI in patientsundergoing high-risk extent I and II TAAA repair, cere-brospinal ﬂuid drainage was associated with a signi ﬁ-
cant reduction in SCI compared with those havingsurgery without cerebrospinal ﬂuid drainage. Over the
past decade, there are few centers performing open
TAAA repair without the aid of cerebrospinal ﬂuid
drainage. Furthermore, patients undergoing endovas-cular repair requiring exte nsive descending thoracic
aorta coverage or in the setting of a previous infrarenalaneurysm repair also bene ﬁt from cerebrospinal ﬂuid
drainage (nonrandomized).
6
2. In patients undergoing open TAAA repair, delayed
paraplegia may account for nearly 60% of all spinal
cord de ﬁcits encountered. Despite having an intact
neurologic examination immediately after the proced-ure, patients can experience these delayed de ﬁcits
anytime in the ﬁrst 2 weeks postoperatively. The re-
ported incidence of delayed SCI is approximately 5%,nearly twice that of de ﬁcits recognized immediatelyRecommendations for TAAA Spinal Cord Protection
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1A1. In patients undergoing open TAAA repair who are at high risk for SCI, cerebrospinal ﬂuid drainage is
recommended to reduce the incidence of temporary SCI, permanent SCI, or both.1-7
1 B-NR2. In patients who experience delayed spinal cord dy sfunction after either open or endovascular TAAA
repair, timely measures to optimize spinal cord perfu sion and decrease intrathecal pressure are recom-
mended ( Table 20 ).1-4,8
TABLE 20Measures to Optimize Spinal Cord and
End-Organ Perfusion
Cardioversion for tachyarrhythmias
Insertion of cerebrospinal ﬂuid drain
Increase mean arterial pressure to >100 mm Hg
Transfuse to a hemoglobin >10 g/dL
Volume resuscitationIsselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e294

after surgery. Delayed de ﬁcits usually present in the
setting of a hemodynamic insult (atrial ﬁbrillation,
hypovolemia, hemorrhage, infection) and may beresponsive to aggressive measures to optimize spinalcord perfusion ( Table 20 ). Cerebrospinal ﬂuid drainage
immediately reduces intrathecal pressure and in-
creases spinal cord perfusion pressure (spinal cordperfusion pressure equals mean arterial pressure minusspinal cord ﬂuid pressure).
8,12,14As i g n i ﬁcant propor-
tion (57%) of patients with late de ﬁcits experience animprovement in their neurologic examination, with
17% having complete resolution of their de ﬁcits.14The
operative mortality rate for those with persistent SCI isnearly 3-fold higher than for those who recover (38%versus 13%, respectively; P<0.001). In addition, 5-year
survival is signi ﬁcantly worse (from 75% with a return
of function to 28% without; P<0.001).
14
6.5.4.4. TAAA Renal and Visceral Organ Protection
Recommendations for TAAA Renal and Visceral Organ Protection
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1A1. In patients undergoing open repair of TAAA involvin g the renal arteries, cold blood or crystalloid renal
perfusion is recommended to provide effect ive protection against renal injury.1-6
1 B-NR2. In patients undergoing open or endovascular TA AA repair who have end-organ ischemia or signi ﬁcant
stenoses from atherosclerotic visceral or renal artery d isease, additional revascularization procedures are
recommended.7
R e c o m m e n d a t i o nf o rA c c e s sD u r i n gE n d o v a s c u l a rR e p a i ro fA A A
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
1 B-R1. In patients undergoing endovascular repair of AAA who have suitable common femoral artery anatomy,
ultrasound-guided percutaneous a ccess and closure is recommended over open cutdown to reduce oper-
ative time, blood loss, length of stay, time to wound healing, and pain.1,2Synopsis
Postoperative renal dysfunction after open TAAA repair
has a signi ﬁcantly negative impact on short- and long-
term mortality as well as quality of life. Efforts to reducerenal injury during open TAAA repair include local organ
hypothermia with either cold crystalloid or cold blood-
based perfusate.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Renal dysfunction after TAAA repair is de ﬁned as a
doubling of the creatinine or the need for hemodialysis.When this signi ﬁcant complication occurs, short- and
long-term survival is compromised, and the incidence
of postoperative respirato ry failure, SCI, and cardiac
complications increase. To identify methods to reducethe incidence of postoperative renal dysfunction, 2RCTs were performed comparing cold crystalloid renalpreservation to normothermic blood perfusate and,subsequently, cold blood perfusate. When comparedwith normothermic blood delivered into the renal ar-teries directly from the left heart bypass circuit, the
delivery of cold crystalloid perfusate into the renal ar-
teries during open TAAA repair resulted in a 3-foldr e d u c t i o ni nt h ei n c i d e n c e of postoperative renaldysfunction.
7Subsequently, cold blood perfusate
delivered to the renal arteries through occlusion orperfusion catheters was found to provide the same levelof renal protection as cold crystalloid perfusate duringopen TAAA repair.
5The results of this second RCT
provided surgeons with 2 options for renal protection
when open TAAA repair requires renal arteryreconstruction.
2. In patients with renal or visceral artery stenoses or
ostial obstruction secondary to chronic or acutedissection ﬂaps, end-organ perfusion may be compro-
mised. Improvement in perfusion to the celiac axis,S M A ,a n db o t hr e n a la r t e r i e sm a yb ea c h i e v e db y
bypass, endarterectomy, or balloon angioplasty and
stent placement. Patency of target vessel revasculari-
zation strategies has been documented in small seriesof patients having open TAAA repair with a“debranching ”technique and in those undergoing
endovascular TAAA repair.
6.5.5. Abdominal Aortic Aneurysms
6.5.5.1. Access During Endovascular Repair of AAAJACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee295

Synopsis
Increased availability of percutaneous closure devices
and lower pro ﬁle endovascular stent grafts have made
ultrasound-guided percutaneous access and closure morefeasible. Two RCTs and a large national retrospective re-
view showed favorable outcomes from percutaneous
common femoral artery access and closure such asreduced operative time, reduced blood loss, andimproved patient-centered outcomes, such as reducedpain.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. The PEVAR trial showed the noninferiority of total
percutaneous access and closure for EVAR for those
with suitable common femoral artery anatomy.
3In the
PiERO (Percutaneous femoral access in EndovascularRepair versus Open femoral access) study, investigatorsevaluated whether ultrasound-guided percutaneousaccess via the common femoral artery decreased therisk of surgical site infections compared with cutdown.Although the incidence of surgical site infections wast o ol o wt op r o d u c ead i f f e r e n c ei no u t c o m e s ,i n -
vestigators found that, compared with open cutdownfor access, groins accessed and closed percutaneouslyhealed faster and patients reported less pain.
1Although
the PEVAR trial did not require ultrasound-guided
femoral access, it was routine in the PiERO trial.
Furthermore, a multicent er observational study of
common femoral artery access showed a signi ﬁcant
decrease in groin hematomas with routine ultrasound-guided access.
4L a s t l y ,i na ne x t e n s i v ec o m p a r i s o no f
different closures using data from 13,087 patients in theVascular Quality Initiative registry, there was a signif-icantly higher rate of cardiac complications (OR, 1.5;
95% CI, 1.14 –2.05) and 30-day mortality rate (OR, 1.56;
95% CI, 1.05 –2.32)
2in those undergoing cutdown versus
percutaneous access.2Operative time, estimated blood
loss, and length of stay were all signi ﬁcantly higher in
those undergoing groin cutdowns compared withpercutaneous access.
6.5.5.2. Repair of Ruptured AAA
Recommendations for Repair of Ruptured AAA
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-R1. In patients presenting with ruptured AAA who are hemodynamically stable, CT imaging is recommended
to evaluate whether the AAA is amenable to endovascular repair.1-3
1 B-R2. In patients presenting with ruptured AAA who have suitable anatomy, endovascular repair is recom-
mended over open repair to reduce th e risk of morbidity and mortality.1,4-6
2a B-NR3. In patients undergoing endovascular repair for ruptured AAA, local anesthesia is preferred to general
anesthesia to reduce risk of perioperative mortality.7-9
2a C-LD4. In patients with ruptured AAA, permissive hypotension can be bene ﬁcial to decrease the rate of
bleeding.1,3,10-12
Synopsis
The mortality rate from ruptured abdominal aortic an-
eurysms (rAAA) is estimated to be 80% to 90%, with mostpatients never reaching the hospital.
13For those who
present to a hospital, the historical mortality rate for open
repair was approximately 50%. With improved team or-
ganization, prompt diagnosis, and endovascular repairoptions, the mortality rate after repair for rAAA has beenreported to be as low as 18.5% after instituting an endo-
vascular repair- ﬁr s ts t r a t e g yi na tl e a st 1 observational
series.
1Initial randomized trials for endovascular repair
for rAAA (rEVAR) versus open repair generally showed noearly survival bene ﬁt. However, shortcomings of these
trials raised questions about their applicability.
2,14,15
Longer-term studies of rEVAR, such as 3-year results
from the IMPROVE (Immediate Management of the PatientIsselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e296

With Rupture: Open Versus Endovascular Repair) trial,
showed late survival bene ﬁt from rEVAR over open repair.
Many authors have evaluated institutional experiencewith using rEVAR in anatomically suitable candidates andaimed to improve the process of care for rAAA by adopting
“rupture protocols ”that include early imaging, permis-
sive hypotension, endovascular balloon occlusion underﬂuoroscopy to reduce excessive bleeding, and a team-
based organization to facilitate immediate transfer ofpatients to the operating room for prompt hemorrhagecontrol and repair.
1,3
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. The IMPROVE trial was the ﬁrst trial to evaluate a new
paradigm in evaluating rAAA.2Speci ﬁcally, patients
who were hemodynamically stable were ﬁrst trans-
ported to the radiology suite for CTA to assess whethertheir ruptured aneurysm was amenable to endovas-c u l a rr e p a i ro rr e q u i r e do p e nr e p a i r .T h i si si nc o n t r a s tto a strategy of transport to the operating room foropen surgery without preoperative imaging. The trial
did not identify any increased risk of death from a
strategy of acquiring preoperative imaging and,because of the different repair options available today,such assessments can help surgeons choose appro-priate therapy based on patient aneurysm anatomy andclinical status. In contemporary practice, many pa-tients will have a CT scan, although some of thesescans will not be ideally timed arterial phase imaging.
Given that time is of the essence in rAAA repair, if a
patient ’sC Ts c a np r o v i d e se n o u g ha n a t o m i ci n f o r m a -
tion to identify whether e ndovascular repair is
feasible, another more dedicated CTA scan may addunnecessary delays to the patient ’sc a r e .
2. Although 3 clinical trials aimed to evaluate potential
survival bene ﬁt for rEVAR over open repair, none
showed signi ﬁcant early bene ﬁt. However, trials
excluded patients who were hemodynamically unsta-
ble, thus excluding patients that may have bene ﬁtted
most from an endovascular approach. It should benoted, however, that the IMP ROVE trial subsequently
showed that between 90 days and 3 years, rEVAR hadsuperior survival rates compared with open repair( h a z a r dr a t i o ,0 . 5 7 ;9 5 %C I ,0 . 3 6 –0.9).
16Contemporary
observational studies showed signi ﬁcant survival
bene ﬁt from an endovascular approach to rAAA. For
example, Wang et al6used propensity-matched data
from the Vascular Quality Initiative registry and
showed that rEVAR resulted in a lower 30-day mor-
tality rate than open repair (21% versus 34%, respec-tively; P<0.001) and that mortality rates after rEVAR
have been steadily decreasing since 2008. Otherstudies have corroborated this general decline in therEVAR mortality rate and comparatively better post-operative outcomes.
4,17Newer endovascular devices
have enabled treatments of rAAA that do not neces-
sarily meet instructions for use criteria. However,
caution should be exercised, because observationalstudies showed increased ri sk of perioperative death
and long-term complications when devices are usedoff-label in a rupture scenario.
18,19
3. Patients presenting with rAAA often maintain
adequate BPs, in part because of the body ’sc a t e c h o l -
amine responses.20H o w e v e r ,o n c ei n d u c e dw i t hg e n -
eral anesthesia, the loss of this physiologic response —
coupled with anesthetic agents that can depress BP —
can lead to circulatory collapse.21-23General anesthesia
has also been shown to have deleterious effects oninﬂammatory and body temperature regulation.
24,25
Subanalysis of the IMPROVE trial showed that pa-
tients with rAAA who under went EVAR with only local
anesthesia had lower risk of mortality compared with
those who were treated under general anesthesia
(adjusted OR, 0.27; 95% CI, 0.1 –0.7).7Although the trial
was not designed and powered for this speci ﬁc
outcome, recent observatio nal studies from large reg-
istries have corroborated this ﬁnding.8,9
4. Although there are no RCTs of outcomes speci ﬁct o
permissive hypotension i n rAAA, data from the trauma
literature evaluating ﬂuid management in hemorrhagic
shock show bene ﬁt in using a strategy of permissive
hypotension.11,12Many authors managing rAAA have
similarly described maintaining low arterial pressuresto decrease rate of bleeding in patients with rAAA.
1,3,10
An SBP that allows a patient to maintain mentation,
t y p i c a l l yb e t w e e n6 0a n d9 0m mH g ,i ss u g g e s t e d .JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee297

6.5.5.3. Threshold for AAA Repair
Synopsis
One of the most signi ﬁcant risk factors for continued
aneurysm growth and rupture is the maximum diameter.Thresholds for AAA repair must balance the expected riskof rupture against the risk of operative intervention.
Historically, the risk of rupture was reported to be 0.5% to
5% for aneurysms <5 cm in maximum diameter, 3% to 15%
for aneurysms 5 cm to 6.9 cm, and $30% for
aneurysms $8c m .
10Multiple trials that are now >2d e -
cades old evaluated the use of early repair of AAAsmeasuring 4.0 cm to 5.4 cm via open or endovascularmeans. All found no survival bene ﬁt attributable to early
repair and but did ﬁnd an increased risk of subsequent
reintervention. These studies and others have found that
r u p t u r ed o e so c c u ra ts m a l l e rd i a m e t e r sf o rw o m e n ;t h u s ,size thresholds for men and women differ to account forthese observed differences.
6,11Newer data highlight other
considerations, such as aortic indexing, which may betterpredict aneurysm rupture risk. Lastly, although limiteddata exist for the natural hi story of saccular AAAs, avail-
able data suggest that their morphologic features may
make them more likely to become symptomatic, rupture
at smaller diameters, or both than fusiform AAAs.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Clinical trials conducted in the late 1990s and early
2000s, including the UKSAT (UK Small Aneurysm Trial)and ADAM (Aneurysm Detection and Management)trial for early open aneurysm repair and CAESAR
(Comparison of surveillance vs. Aortic Endografting for
Small Aneurysm Repair) and PIVOTAL (Positive Impactof endoVascular Options for Treating Aneurysm earLy)trials for early endovascular repair, did not ﬁnd asurvival bene ﬁt for repair of aortic aneurysms
measuring 4.0 cm to 5.4 cm.
1-5Although long-term
outcomes in the UKSAT group seemed to show bettersurvival rates in patients in the early open surgerygroup, this was thought to be attributable to higher
rates of smoking cessation in the early surgery group
compared with the surveillance group.
2,3Based on
these data, balancing the risk of intervention versusthe risk of rupture, a threshold of $5.5 cm is acceptable
for men with infrarenal AAA. In the UKSAT study,which included more women than the previousstudies, women were found to have higher rates ofaneurysm rupture and higher rates of aneurysm-
related deaths than men.
2,3The mean maximum
aneurysm diameter at rupture was 5.0 cm in womenand 6.0 cm in men. More recent data highlight adifferent method for quantifying aneurysm rupturerisk by indexing aneurysm size to the BSA (ASI equalsaneurysm diameter [cm]/BSA [m
2]); in women, ASI has
b e e ns h o w nt ob em o r ep r e d i c t i v eo fr u p t u r er i s kt h a nis maximum diameter.
12Further research will help
clarify whether ASI is a better metric for aneurysm
repair thresholds than maximum diameter.12
2. Approximately 6% to 22% of treated aneurysms are
symptomatic but unruptured. Symptoms that areconsidered high risk for i mpending rupture include
pain in the back, abdomen, or ﬂank, and sometimes
radiating to the groin, which is attributable to the AAA.Patients presenting with such symptoms should be
admitted to an ICU for arterial BP monitoring, tight BP
control, medical optimization, and AAA repair, ideallyin 24 to 48 hours to reduce risk of free rupture. Othersymptoms that warrant expedited, although notRecommendations for the Threshold for AAA Repair
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1A1. In patients with unruptured AAA, repair is recommended in those with a maximal aneurysm diameter
of‡5.5 cm in men or ‡5.0 cm in women.1-6
1 B-NR2. In patients with unruptured AAA who have symptoms that are attributable to the aneurysm, repair is
recommended to reduce the risk of rupture.7,8
2b C-LD3. In patients with unruptured saccular AAA, intervention to reduce the risk of rupture may be reasonable.9
2b C-LD4. In patients with unruptured AAA and aneurysm growth of ‡0 . 5c mi n6m o n t h s ,r e p a i rt or e d u c et h er i s k
of rupture may be reasonable.1-5Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e298

necessarily urgent AAA repair, include tenderness to
palpation overlying the AAA in the abdomen, back, orﬂank, embolism (eg, blue toe syndrome) or compressive
symptoms (eg, obstructive uropathy). Observationalstudies show that patients treated for symptomatic
aneurysms have higher mortality and morbidity rates
than those treated electively.
7,8Although timing of
repair of symptomatic aneurysms remains controver-sial, most studies have reported outcomes of symp-tomatic aneurysms repaired during a patient ’si n d e x
operation, with some studies ﬁnding that performing
surgery on a nonemergency basis and potentially opti-mizing patient ’s cardiorespiratory status during their
hospitalization may be advantageous.
8,13-15
3 .S a c c u l a rA A A sa r er a r ea n d ,c o n s e q u e n t l y ,t h e r ea r e
limited natural history data. In a Dutch registry of pa-tients treated for fusiform and saccular AAAs, re-searchers found that saccular aneurysms appearedmore common in women and were more likely to besymptomatic at smaller sizes than fusiform aneu-rysms.
9Of 7,659 patients with AAA, 6.1% had saccular
AAA. Of patients with saccular aneurysms and acute
presentation, 25% had diameters <5.5 cm, and 8.4%
had diameters <4.5 cm. In contrast, only 8.1% and
0.6% of patients with fusiform AAA presenting acutelyhad diameters <5.5 cm and <4.5 cm, respectively. In
their 2017 guidelines on AAA,16the Society for Vascular
Surgery recommended elective repair of patients pre-senting with saccular AAA, although size guidance islacking because of limited natural history data. Clearly,
the decision to intervene must be informed by the
patient ’s individual anatomy.
4. Pooled analysis from thousands of patients included in
AAA surveillance studies from North America, WesternEurope, and East Asia showed that, although aneurysmgrowth is highly variable, g rowth rates range from 1.5
mm/y to 2 mm/y for those with AAA of 3.0 cm to 3.9 cmand from 3.3 mm/y to 5.7 mm/y in AAA of 4.0 cm to 5.9
cm at baseline.
17,18The 4 major trials evaluating ef ﬁ-
cacy of early open and endovascular treatment of AAAfor small aneurysms all excluded patients with aneu-rysms that grew $7m mi n6m o n t h so r >10 mm in 12
months, given concern for increased risk of rupture.Thus, balancing the risks, aneurysms with size in-creases of $0.5 cm in 6 months or $1 cm in 1 year are
considered to be rapidly growing and may warrant
consideration of repair.
6.5.5.4. Open Versus Endovascular Repair of AAA
Recommendations for Open Versus Endovascular Repair of AAA
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1A1. In patients with nonruptured AAA with low to moderat e operative risk and who have anatomy suitable for
either open or EVAR, a shared decision-making process weighing the risks and bene ﬁts of each approach is
recommended.1-11
1 B-NR2. In patients undergoing elective endovascular re pair for nonruptured AAA, adherence to manufacturer ’s
instructions for use is recommended.12-16
2a B-NR3. In patients with nonruptured AAA and a high periop erative risk, EVAR is reasonable to reduce the risk of
30-day morbidity, mortality, or both.9,10
2a B-NR4. For patients with nonruptured AAA, a moderate to high perioperative risk, and anatomy suitable for an
FDA-approved fenestrated endovascular device, en dovascular repair is reasonable over open repair to
reduce the risk of perioperative complications.10,11,17,18
Synopsis
Options for repair of AAA have substantially grown
since the ﬁrst description of open repair in 1952.19In
particular, EVAR has made it possible to treat patients whomay have never quali ﬁed for open surgery because of
signi ﬁcant cardiopulmonary comorbidities, renal comor-
bidities, or both. With the abundance of options, cliniciansmust remain informed regarding empirical data that mayfavor one approach over another in a particular patientand consider patient preferences for surgical options
when data support either approach. Historic RCTs evalu-a t i n go u t c o m e so fE V A Rv e r s u so p e nr e p a i rs h o w e da ninitial survival advantage for EVAR that dissipates atdifferent time intervals.
1,3-8Contemporary in vestigations
have shown a steady decline in mortality rates for EVAR in
general20and a much larger perioperative survival bene ﬁt
from EVAR versus open repair.9However, similar to his-
toric clinical trials, these survival bene ﬁts can dissipateJACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee299

over time and must be weighed against suboptimal sur-
veillance that can occur in those treated with EVAR,leading to higher rates of late rupture and associateddeath.
21For repair of juxtarenal aneurysms using FDA-
approved fenestrated devices, available data show
similar ﬁndings (ie, an initial survival bene ﬁtt h a tm a y
wane over time).10,11
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Pooled data from 7 RCTs evaluating all-cause death
after EVAR versus open surgery for infrarenal AAArepair show that the risk of perioperative mortality ismuch lower in those treated with EVAR (OR, 0.36; 95%
CI, 0.2 –0.66). This advantage persists at 6 months, af-
ter which survival from both approaches becomeequivalent. Moreover, after 8 years, those treated withEVAR have a higher risk of aneurysm-related death(hazard ratio, 5.12; 95% CI, 1.6 –16.4), secondary inter-
vention (hazard ratio, 2.1; 95% CI, 1.7 –2.7), aneurysm
rupture (OR 5; 95% CI, 1.1 –23.3), and death attributable
to rupture (OR 3.6; 95% CI, 1.9 –6.8) compared with
open repair.
22O b s e r v a t i o n a ls t u d i e s ,s u c ha st h el a r g e
propensity-matched study evaluating EVAR and openrepair in a Medicare population, found that the sur-vival advantage for EVAR lasted longer among olderpatients.
9For complex repairs, a similar survival
advantage is seen for fenestrated repair over complexopen repairs in the ﬁrst 30 days after surgery. More
data are necessary to identify longer-term outcomes
and to determine for which groups one approach may
be more advantageous. Given the current clinicalequipoise, engaging the pat ient in a process of shared
decision-making is recommended, as further detailedin Section 5,“Shared Decision-Making. ”
2. Patient-speci ﬁc anatomical characteristics of the aorta,
such as neck diameter, length, and angulation, andiliac seal diameter, length, and vessel access, must all
be considered in endovascular repair. Some observa-
tional studies show that treating aneurysms outside ofthe manufacturer ’s instructions for use increases fail-
ure rates, resulting in increased risks of graft migra-t i o n ,e n d o l e a k s ,l a t er u p t u r e ,a n dd e a t h s .
12,13For
example, Shanzer et al12found that in a multicenter
retrospective study of >10,000 patients undergoing
EVAR between 1999 and 2008, patients with AAA
treated with devices off instructions for use had
signi ﬁcantly higher rates of s ac enlargement. More
recently, Herman et al13found that any deviation from
instructions for use increased risk of graft-relatedadverse events (hazard ratio, 1.8; 95% CI, 1.05 –3.1). A
meta-analysis of 17 studies found that patients treatedwith noninstructions for use higher overall mortalityrates (hazard rati o, 1.2; 95% CI, 1.02 –1.42; P¼0.03).
14
Given these ﬁndings, in most patients, treating offinstructions for use in elective AAA repair is discour-
aged. Those who have been treated off instructions foruse warrant closer follow-up because of higher rates offailure from endoleaks, graft migration, and laterupture.
3. EVAR-2 (UK Endovascular Aneurysm Repair 2) was an
RCT that evaluated outcomes of EVAR in high-riskpatients. Patients were enrolled if they were deter-mined to be un ﬁt for open surgery, with ﬁtness
assessed using cardiac, respi ratory, and renal criteria.
23
In these patients, the trial initially showed that EVAR
did not improve survival compared with the control ofno intervention; however, more than a decade later,
those treated with EVAR had signi ﬁcantly lower
aneurysm-related mortalit y (hazard ratio, 0.55; 95% CI,
0.34 –0.91).
24,25Contemporary analyses of outcomes in
high-risk patients show that perioperative death afterEVAR has markedly decreased (eg, 9% in EVAR-2versus 1.9% in the ACS national registry).
26Further-
more, in evaluating a propensity-matched Medicarepopulation, postoperative complications that are more
likely to affect high-risk patients, such as myocardial
infarction, pneumonia, acute renal failure, and needfor dialysis, were all signi ﬁcantly less likely to occur
after infrarenal EVAR compared with open repair.
9In
assessing which patients are “high risk ”for elective
AAA repair, risk calculators derived using data from theVascular Quality Initiative and the Vascular StudyGroup of New England can be helpful in informing
discussions with patients about repair options and
potentially identify patients for which even EVARwould be of prohibitively high risk.
27-29
4. Recent observational studies aimed to compare out-
comes between open and endovascular repair forcomplex aortic aneurysms. Using propensity score
matching, investigators found that perioperative mor-tality rates between patients undergoing open repair or
FEVAR were similar in those enrolled in the Vascular
Quality Initiatives registry (4.7% versus 3.3%, respec-
tively, P¼0.17).
17Evaluating data from the ACS, Var-
kevisser et al found much higher odds of 30-day deathfrom open repair compared with FEVAR (OR, 4.9; 95%CI, 1.4 –19).
10The risk of immediate postoperative
complications, such as myocardial infarction, acutekidney injury, and the initiation of dialysis, is signi ﬁ-
cantly higher after open complex repair compared with
FEVAR.
11,17,18However, rates of late reintervention are
higher after FEVAR,11,18as are the rates of persistent
renal impairment11and 3-year mortality rate
(excluding perioperative deaths) (hazard ratio, 1.7; 95%CI, 1.1 –2.6).
17Thus, similar to infrarenal repair, FEVAR
may be most bene ﬁcial for the moderate- to high-risk
surgical candidates who are more likely to experience
perioperative complications.Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e300

6.5.5.5. Treatment of Concomitant Common Iliac Aneurysms
Synopsis
The prevalence of common iliac artery aneurysms in
t h ep r e s e n c eo fA A Ah a sb e e nr e p o r t e dt ob ea sh i g ha s
20% to 40% in surveillance studies.1,2In patients with
both aortic and iliac aneurysms, it is common for an iliacaneurysm to reach a size appropriate for elective repairbefore the AAA does. Although no randomized studies foriliac aneurysm repair size thresholds exist, in large caseseries and registry reports, rupture of iliac aneurysms atdiameters <4c mi sr a r e .
3,7Thus, a repair threshold of 3.5
cm seems reasonable to balance procedural risks with
rupture risk. Furthermore, to achieve adequate AAA
repair, repair of iliac artery ectasia or aneurysms oftenmay be required. Considerat ion of pelvic perfusion is of
great importance when managing concomitant iliac dis-ease. In such cases, there is a high risk of ischemic com-plications from exclusion of internal iliac arteries that canlead to buttock claudication, bowel ischemia, and erectiledysfunction.
5,6For some patients, adequate treatment of
diseased iliac arteries cannot be accomplished without
internal iliac artery sacri ﬁce. Thus, individualized treat-
ment plans with shared decision-making are importantwhen treating aorto-iliac aneurysm disease.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. In a large single-center case series by Huang et al,
8438
patients with common iliac artery aneurysms were
observed for an average of 3.7 years. Eighty-six percent
of patients had current or previously treated AAA.
Common iliac artery aneurysms grew at an average rateof 2.9 mm/y, and no iliac aneurysm #3.8 cm ruptured.
A multinational retrospective review of patients withinternal iliac artery aneurysms found that 41.7% of in-dividuals had a concomitant AAA. Of 63 patients,1 patient presented with a ruptured internal iliac artery
aneurysm of #3 cm, and 4 individuals ’iliac aneurysms
ruptured at diameters #4 cm. Recently published data
from the Dutch Surgical Aneurysm Audit showed that
of the 857 patients with treated iliac artery aneurysms,the median iliac artery aneurysm size at elective repairwas 4.3 cm, while ruptured iliac aneurysms had a me-dian diameter of 6.8 cm at presentation.
2. In a meta-analysis of studies reporting exclusion or
preservation of the internal iliac artery, Kouvelos et al
5
found an increased pooled occurrence of buttock
claudication in those undergoing unilateral (27%) or
bilateral (36%) internal i liac artery exclusion. In a
separate meta-analysis, Bosanquet et al6found similar
rates of buttock claudication, as well as a 10% occur-rence of erectile dysfunction in men. Other ischemicevents, such as spinal, bowel, and gluteal ischemia,were rare, occurring at a rate of <1%.
6Another
consideration in treating aorto-iliac disease is the risk
of late intervention from growth of ectatic or aneu-
rysmal iliac arteries. In a retrospective analysis ofprospectively collected data, Gibello et al
4found that
in patients with AAA undergoing EVAR, after a meanfollow-up of 6.2 years, those with common iliac arteriesof$18 mm in diameter had a signi ﬁcantly higher rate of
type Ib endoleaks (7.2% versus 3.2%; P¼0.01) and late
reinterventions (19% versus 11.8%; P¼0.01), leading to
higher odds of composite EVAR failure (OR, 1.8; 95% CI,
1.2–2.7) and need for reintervention (OR, 1.9; 95% CI,
1.15–3.3). Hassen-Khodja et al
10and Sala et al9found
that, after open repair of AAA, common iliac arteriesof$18 mm in diameter tended to dilate over time,
warranting consideration of bifurcated grafting rather
than aorto-aortic tube grafting.
9,10Recommendations for the Treatment of Concomitant Common Iliac Aneurysms
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 C-LD1. For patients with asymptomatic small AAA and c oncomitant common iliac artery aneurysm(s) ‡3.5 cm,
elective repair of both abdominal and iliac aneurysms is recommended.1-4
1 B-NR2. When treating common iliac artery aneurysms or ect asia as part of AAA repair, preservation of at least
1 hypogastric artery is recommended, if anatomically feasible, to decrease the risk of pelvic ischemia.5,6JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee301

6.5.6. Surveillance After Aneurysm Repair
6.5.6.1. Surveillance After TAA Repair
Synopsis
T h er o l eo fs u r v e i l l a n c ei m a g i n ga f t e rt h o r a c i ca n e u -
rysm repair is to identify complications of the repair ormonitor for progression of residual aortic pathology. CT isgenerally the preferred imaging modality for surveillanceimaging after TEVAR
7,15; MRI, although generally more
limited by metallic artifact, is a reasonable alternative.Open repair of the thoracic aorta is durable.
2,5,10-14In
patients undergoing TEVAR, t here is a higher incidence of
complications and reinterven tion compared with patients
undergoing open repair2,4,5,10-12; TEVAR complications
can include endoleak (see Section 2.6 ,“Classi ﬁcation of
Endoleaks ”), retrograde type A aortic dissection, stent-
graft migration, stent-graft fracture or collapse, and anincrease in aortic size.
6,7Complications of open repair
that can be detected by surveillance imaging include graft
infection and anastomotic pseudoaneurysm.10,16Addi-
tionally, after both open repair and TEVAR, patients maydevelop progressive aneurysmal dilation of adjacent orremote aortic segments.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Use of TEVAR is associated with reintervention rates
ranging from 7% to 23%.
1,2,4,5I nt h eG o r eT A Gs t u d y ,17
there was an 11% incidence of endoleak18at 30 days,
6% at 1 year, and 9% at 2-year follow-up afterTEVAR.2,17A 6-month follow-up study may be useful in
detecting a delayed retrograde type A aortic dissection.
2. MRI has some advantages over CT, including the
avoidance of ionizing radia tion and iodinated intrave-
nous contrast administration.7,8However, MRI is
limited by its higher cost, longer acquisition times,lower resolution, and limited visualization of metallicstent graft components and adjacent structures. MRI
has a potential growing role , particularly in patients
who are middle aged or younger, in whom the conse-quences of lifelong surveillance in terms of contrast-induced nephropathy and cumulative radiation doseshould be considered.
9
3. Open repair for any segment of the thoracic aorta has
proven to be durable in extended follow-up.10,11,13,14,19
Treatment failure after open repair of either the prox-
imal or distal thoracic aort a requiring reintervention
ranges from 1% to 7% in long-term (10-year) follow-up.
10-12In patients without a genetic syndrome or re-
sidual aortopathy shown on a postoperative imaging,surveillance can be done at longer intervals.
4. The appropriate frequency surveillance imaging in the
presence of abnormal ﬁndings has neither been stud-
ied nor validated but, in such cases, annual surveil-
lance imaging is typical. Patients requiring
reintervention have a higher incidence of HTAD.
10,16Recommendations for Surveillance After TAA Repair
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In patients treated with TEVAR, surveillanc e imaging with CT is recommended after 1 month and
12 months and, if stable, annually thereafter.1-5
2a B-NR2. In patients treated with TEVAR, longitudinal surveillance with MRI is a reasonable alternative to CT for
reduction of long-term radiation exposure or avoidance of an iodinated contrast allergy.6-9
2a B-NR3. In patients treated with open repair of the thoracic aorta without residual aort opathy, surveillance im-
aging with a CT or MRI within 1 year postoperatively and then every 5 years thereafter is reasonable.10-14
2a C-EO4. In patients treated with open repair of the thoracic aorta who have residual aortopathy or abnormal
ﬁndings on surveillance imaging, annual surveillance imaging is reasonable.Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e302

6.5.6.2. Surveillance After AAA Repair
Synopsis
T h er o l eo fr o u t i n es u r v e i l l a n c ea f t e rE V A Ri st oi d e n -
t i f ye n d o l e a k ,s a cg r o w t h ,e n d o g r a f tm i g r a t i o n ,o rendograft failure. Although t he initial surveillance in-
tervals after EVAR were at 1 month, 6 months, and 12months postoperatively to be consistent with surveillance
imaging intervals used in FDA-sponsored device trials,
more recent data suggest that the 6-month interval can beeliminated if no concerning ﬁndings are observed on the
1-month imaging ( Table 21 ).
1,2
CT is the gold standard for follow-up imaging after
EVAR, but it is expensive, exposes the patient to ionizingradiation, and requires the use of iodinated contrast thatis potentially nephrotoxic.
12,13Duplex ultrasound, with or
without contrast enhancement, has been shown to be
speci ﬁc for the detection of endoleaks after EVAR9,14and
complex EVAR15; however, ultrasound is limited in its
ability to detect stent migration, fracture, or noncontig-uous aneurysms. MRI has high diagnostic accuracy forendoleaks
16but must be accompanied by a plain abdom-
inal radiograph to assess for endograft stent fracture,because MRI cannot accurately visualize the metallic
stent struts.
T h er o l eo fr o u t i n es u r v e i l l a n c ea f t e ro p e nA A Ar e p a i ri s
to prevent late aneurysm rupture and aneurysm-relateddeath by detecting para-anastomotic and new aneu-rysms. Para-anastomotic an eurysms can occur after open
AAA repair as a result of anastomotic disruption, leadingto pseudoaneurysm form ation or progression ofaneurysmal disease in the adjacent visceral aorta or iliac
arteries.
17Patients with a history of AAA are also at risk of
developing an aortic aneurysm in a noncontiguouslocation.
18
Recommendation-Speci ﬁcS u p p o r t i v eT e x t
1. The incidence of late aortic rupture after EVAR is >5%
through 8 years of follow-up.3Signi ﬁcant risk factors
for rupture include endoleak with associated aneurysmsac enlargement.
19,20Endoleaks may be present for
10% to 17% of EVAR at 30 days postoperatively.1,2In
patients without early (30-day) endoleak, the inci-dence of new endoleak at 6 and 12 months post-operatively is similar.
1Earlier detection of an endoleak
at 6 vs. 12 months is not associated with improved
long-term outcomes.1,2
2. Stent graft fracture and migration is a long-term
complication after EVAR that occurs in 3% to 4% ofpatients by 4 years postoperatively.
7,8Duplex ultra-
sound has been shown to be speci ﬁc for the detection
of endoleaks after EVAR9,14,15but is limited in its
ability to detect stent migration, fracture, or new
noncontiguous aneurysms.
3. Duplex ultrasound is 95% accurate for measuring aortic
aneurysm sac diameter and 100% speci ﬁcf o rt h e
detection of type I and type III endoleaks ( Figure 11 )
after EVAR but is insuf ﬁcient for detecting type II
endoleaks9or for characterizing anatomy related to
stent graft migration or failure.Recommendations for Surveillance After AAA Repair
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In patients with AAA treated with EVAR, baseline surveillance imaging with CT is recommended at
1 month postoperatively1,2; if there is no evidence of endoleak or sac enlargement, continued surveillance
with duplex ultrasound at 12 months and then annually thereafter is recommended.1,3,4
2a C-LD2. In patients with AAA treated with EVAR who are unde rgoing annual surveillan ce imaging duplex ultra-
sound, additional cross-sectional imaging with CT or MRI of the abdomen and pelvis every 5 yearspostoperatively is reasonable.
5-8
2a C-LD3. In patients with AAA treated with EVAR and abnormal ﬁndings ( Table 21 ) on any surveillance duplex
ultrasound, additional cross-sectional imaging with CT or MRI is reasonable.9
2a C-LD4. In patients with AAA treated with complex EVAR, a modi ﬁed surveillance imaging plan that combines
cross-sectional imaging and duplex ult rasound of target vessels is reasonable.10,11
2a C-LD5. In patients with AAA who have undergone open repair, surveillance imaging with CT or MRI of the
abdominopelvic aorta within 1 year postoperatively and then every 5 years thereafter is reasonable.5,6JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee303

4. Duplex ultrasound has been shown to be a useful mo-
dality for surveillance of target branch vessels11after
FEVAR. However, complex EVAR involving stentingof$1of the renovisceral vessels is at higher risk of type
III endoleak than standard EVAR
10and may bene ﬁt
from routine cross-section al imaging for surveillance
of fenestration sites, branch junctions, and adequacy
ofﬂow in the renal and mesenteric arteries.21
5. Para-anastomotic aneu rysms after open AAA repair
tend to occur late, with estimated incidence rates of1 % ,6 % ,a n d2 7 %t o3 5 %a t5 ,1 0 ,a n d1 5y e a r sp o s t -operatively, respectively.
5,6Late aortic aneurysms in
noncontiguous arterial segments from the initial aorticrepair have been reported in 45% at a mean of 7 years
postoperatively.
18As a result, the Society for Vascular
Surgery and the European Society of Cardiology haveboth recommended surveillance imaging every 5 yearsafter open AAA repair.
22No data support the use of 1
cross-sectioning imaging modality over another for thesurveillance of para-anastomotic aneurysms after open
AAA repair.18
7. ACUTE AORTIC SYNDROMES
7.1. Presentation
AAS, although uncommon, are associated with life-
threatening complications and a mortality rate as high
as 1% to 2%/h if the AAS is not rapidly identi ﬁed and
appropriate therapy is not instituted promptly.1The
diagnosis of AAS can be chall enging, however, because
the presenting symptoms overlap with other more com-mon emergency department complaints.
Although the classic textbook description of AAS is of
acute “tearing ”or “ripping ”pain, patients more
commonly report the abrupt onset of severe “sharp ”or
“stabbing ”pain in the chest or back (and sometimes
abdomen), maximal at the start, that sometimes radi-ates.
2-5Depending on the extent of aortic involvement,
patients may present with various additional signs andsymptoms ( Table 22 ). Recording a careful history of the
presenting symptoms is essential, as is obtaining adetailed family history of TAAs, genetic aortopathies,aortic dissection, or unexplained sudden death.
BP should be measured in both arms and both lower
extremities, to exclude a BP differential resulting from anAAS. One should auscultate for the murmurs of aorticstenosis, perhaps indicating an underlying BAV, and AR,which commonly accompanies type A aortic dissection.TABLE 21Abnormal Findings on Duplex Imaging After
EVAR That Should Prompt Additional Imaging
Aneurysm sac enlargement
Any endoleak
Stent graft fracture
Stent graft migrationStent graft separation
EVAR indicates endovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repair.
TABLE 22 Signs and Symptoms of AAS
Clinical Signs and Symptoms Cause
Asymmetric blood pressure ( >20 mm Hg) between limbs Compromise of branch artery ﬂow
Bowel ischemia or gastrointestinal bleed Malperfusion of the celiac or superior mesenteric arteryDysphagia Compression of the esophagusDyspnea Compression of trachea or bronchus, congestive heart failure from aortic regurgitation, or cardiac tamponadeHemoptysis Vascular rupture into lung parenchyma
Hoarseness Compression recurrent laryngeal nerve
Horner ’s syndrome Compression of sympathetic chain
Myocardial ischemia or myocardial infarction Coronary artery involvement by dissection or compression by aneurysmNew murmur of aortic regurgitation Incomplete aortic valve closure secondary to lea ﬂet tethering by the dilated aorta or cusp prolapse
because of dissection into the aortic root
Oliguria or hematuria (gross) Malperfusion of 1 or both renal arteriesParaplegia Spinal malperfusion attributable intercostal artery involvementLower extremity ischemia Malperfusion of iliac arteryShock Cardiac tamponade, hemothorax, frank aortic rupture, acute severe aortic regurgitation, severe myocardial
ischemia
Shortness of breath Pericardial effusion, congestive heart failure from acute severe aortic regurgitation, or hemothoraxStroke symptoms Carotid or vertebral artery involvedSuperior vena cava syndrome Compression of the superior vena cavaSyncope Carotid artery involvement or cardiac tamponade
AAS indicates acute aortic syndrome.Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e304

7.2. AAS: Diagnostic Evaluation (Imaging, Laboratory Testing)
Synopsis
A plain chest x-ray is neither suf ﬁciently sensitive nor
speci ﬁc for AAS to be used to be diagnostic, but certain
radiographic ﬁndings ( Table 23 )m a yr a i s es u s p i c i o no f
aortic dissection or suggest an alternate diagnosis for the
patient ’s symptoms, in particular when there is previous
radiography that shows the changes to be new in the in-terval.
1,2,7Fortunately, CT, TEE, and MRI are all highly
accurate for the diagnosis of AAS.3Aortography is rarely
used given its invasive nature and signi ﬁcantly lower
sensitivity than the other imaging modalities.8Acute
aortic dissection risk scorin gs y s t e m s( e g ,a o r t i cd i s s e c -
tion detection risk score [AAD-RS] or aorta simpli ﬁed
score [AORTAs]) can aid in the diagnostic evaluation of
patients presenting with AAS ( Table 24 and Table 25 )5,9-12
but have not been uniformly adopted.4No biomarkers
are considered diagnostic, although in patients with a lowprevious probability of AAS a nonelevated D-dimer ( <500
ng/mL) makes the diagnosis unlikely. Consequently,integrating a low aortic dissection risk score and a low D-dimer may be a useful strategy to exclude the diagnosis of
AAS.
13
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Although the sensitivity and specify of CT, MRI, and
TEE are all high,3CT has become the preferred mo-
dality for evaluating most patients with suspected AAS.CT is widely available at all hours in the emergency
department and is quick to perform. Not only doesit diagnose the underlying AAS, it also shows thefull extent of the dissection and, in some cases,the entry tear site. CT can detect the presence and
mechanism of aortic branch vessel involvement as
well as vessel patency, signs of malperfusion, pericar-dial effusion and hemopericardium, periaortic ormediastinal hematoma, and pleural effusion. Useof electrocardiographic-synchronized CT techniquesshould be considered when there is a need to accu-rately depict mediastinal structures (eg, proximalaorta, coronary ostia). When IMH is present, the extent
and thickness of the hematoma can be documented
and, when PAUs are present, the presence of and size ofpseudoaneurysms can be easily de ﬁned.
2. In general, the choice of the initial imaging modality
should be based on the patient ’s history and clinical
presentation, the speci ﬁc clinical questions to be
answered, and the institutional availability, experi-ence, and expertise with each of the diagnostic imaging
techniques.
6In certain clinical circumstances, forRecommendations for AAS: Diagnostic Evaluation (Imaging, Laboratory Testing)
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 C-LD1. In patients with a suspected AAS, CT is recommended for initial diagnostic imaging, given its wide
availability, accuracy, and speed, as well as t he extent of anatomic detail it provides.1-5
2a C-LD2. In patients with a suspected AAS, TEE and MRI are reasonable alternatives for initial
diagnostic imaging.1-6
TABLE 23Plain Chest X-Ray Suggestive of Aortic
Dissection2
Signs of Aortic Dissection on Chest X-Ray Findings
Mediastinal widening
Disruption of the normally distinct contour of the aortic knob”Calcium sign, ”which appears as a separation of the intimal calci ﬁcation from the
aortic wall of >5m m
Double density appearance within the aortaTracheal deviation to the rightDeviation of the nasogastric tube to the right
Reprinted with permission from Strayer et al.2.TABLE 24Aortic Dissection Detection Risk Score (ADD-RS)
Items5,14
High-Risk ConditionsHigh-Risk Pain
FeaturesHigh-Risk Examination
Features
nMarfan syndrome or
other connective tissue
disease
nFamily history of aortic
disease
nKnown aortic valvedisease
nRecent aorticmanipulation
nKnown thoracic aorticaneurysmChest, back, or
abdominal pain
described as:
nAbrupt onset
nSevere inintensity
nRipping or tearing
in qualitynPulse de ﬁcit or systolic
blood pressure differential
nFocal neurologic de ﬁcit
(with pain)
nMurmur of aortic regurgita-tion (new, with pain)
nHypotension or shock state
For each risk category, 1 point is assigned if $1 risk factors are present. Consequently, the total
ADD-RS will range from 0 to 3. An ADD-RS of 0 points is low risk; 1 point is moderate risk; and 2 to 3
points is high risk. Adapted with permission from Hiratzka et al.5Copyright 2010, American Heart
Association, Inc., and American College of Cardiology Foundation .JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee305

example, patients with a history of an iodinated
contrast reaction or patients who are too unstable totravel to the radiology suite, CT may not be preferred.Echocardiography (TEE/TTE) is an alternative. TTE isnoninvasive, can be performed at the bedside, and maybe helpful in eliciting the diagnosis of AAS and quicklyidentifying complications of AAS, such as AR or peri-
cardial effusion and tamponade. TEE is preferred toTTE, however, because of its higher sensitivity andbetter anatomic resolution; TEE can be performed atthe bedside in the emergency department or, alterna-
tively, once the patient is in the operating room. MRI is
most commonly the third-choice modality, given that itis not readily available, requires skilled interpretation,and has longer acquisition times, as well as the fact it ischallenging to provide clinical care to potentially un-stable patients while in an MRI scanner. Consequently,MRI is most often used as a follow-up imaging modalityin patients in which there is diagnostic uncertainty.
Nevertheless, MRI may be the study of choice in the
acute setting for a stable patient with a contraindica-tion to iodinated contrast.
7.3. Medical Management of AAS
7.3.1. Acute Medical Management of AASTABLE 25Aorta Simpli ﬁed Score (AORTAs)11Pretest
Probability Assessment Score
Clinical Item Points
Hypotension/shock 2
Aneurysm 1Pulse de ﬁcit 1
Neurologic de ﬁcit 1
Severe pain 1
Sudden-onset pain 1
The patient is given the number of points corresponding to each clinical item that is
positive in the patient ’s presentation. The points are summed, and a total score of 0 to 1
point is low-probability of aortic dissection, where a total of $2 points is high proba-
bility. Reprinted with permission from Morello et al.11
Recommendations for Acute Medical Management of AAS
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In patients presenting to the hospital with AAS, prompt treatment with anti-impulse therapy with
invasive monitoring of BP with an arterial line in an ICU setting is recommended as initial treatment to
decrease aortic wall stress.1-5
1 C-LD2. Patients with AAS should be treated to an SBP <120 mm Hg or to lowest BP that maintains adequate end-
organ perfusion, as well as to a target heart rate of 60 to 80 bpm.3,6
1 B-NR3. In patients with AAS, initial management should in clude intravenous beta blockers, except in patients
with contraindications.2,5,7
2a B-NRIn those with contraindications or intolerance to bet a blockers, initial management with an intravenous
non-dihydropyridine calcium channel blo cker is reasonable for heart rate control.1,2,5
1 C-LD4. In patients with AAS, initial management should in clude intravenous vasodilators if the BP is not well
controlled after initiation of int ravenous beta-blocker therapy.8
1 C-EO5. Patients with AAS should be treated with pain c ontrol, as needed, to help with hemodynamic
management.
Synopsis
Patients presenting with AAS need to be treated
promptly to prevent acute and chronic complications. In
all patients with AAS, immediate medical therapy is
indicated while considering urgent surgical (in patientswith type A aortic dissection) , endovascular intervention(in patients with type B aortic dissection), or both; med-
ical therapy includes aggressive heart rate and BP man-agement as well as pain control. Studies have shown that,
beyond surgical and endovascular treatment, medical
therapy has an important role in decreasing long-termaorta-related adverse events.
1,4,9-11Beta blockers andIsselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e306

intravenous vasodilators are the medications most
commonly studied for the initial treatment of patientswith AAS, with the goal of decreasing aortic wall stress.
2,8
A recent large study showed tha t angiotensin-converting
enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs) and ARBs are bene ﬁcial in the
long-term management of hypertension in patients with
aortic dissection.5Statins are used routinely in patients
after aortic dissection, although the evidence is not veryrobust.
12
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. There are no randomized studies that have evaluated
different medical treatments in the treatment of AAS,
although extensive clinical experience has established
the current standard of anti -impulse therapy. This is
usually accomplished with a combination of intrave-nous beta blockers (eg, esmolol, metoprolol, andlabetalol) and vasodilators (eg, nicardipine, clevidi-pine, and sodium nitroprusside) with the goal ofreducing both heart rate and BP to decrease aortic wallstress.
2-5,7,8,11
2. Small, single-center studies have highlighted the
importance of reducing heart rate to 60 to 80 bpm andSBP to <120 mm Hg. Experts believe that the lowest BP
that does not compromise end-organ function shouldbe targeted.
3,113. Intravenous beta blockers have been the mainstay of
acute medical treatment, and studies reporting bene-ﬁts over the long term and emphasizing the importance
of continuing this therap y at the time of hospital
discharge to improve clinical outcomes.
1-3,5,7,9Caution
should be used in patients with contraindications to
beta blockers (eg, acute AR, heart block, or brady-cardia). In patients who are in tolerant to beta blockers,
intravenous non-dihydropyridine calcium channelblockers (ie, verapamil or dil tiazem) are typically used
for initial treatment.
2
4. Intravenous vasodilators are useful adjunctive therapy
for intravenous beta blockers but should be avoided as
initial treatment (before starting beta blockers or cal-
cium channel blockers), given the potential forcompensatory tachycardia.
8,9
5. Pain related to AAS can trigger a rise in heart rate and
BP, so treating the pain symptoms can help to controlthe patient ’s BP and heart rate. Intravenous opiates are
particularly ef ﬁcacious in this situation. Intravenous
nonsteroidal anti-in ﬂammatory drugs, such as ketor-
olac, may not be suitable because of the risk of
inducing hypertension as well as adverse renal effects.
7.3.2. Subsequent Medical Management of AAS
Recommendation for Subsequent Medical Management of AAS
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
1 B-NR1. In patients with AAS, it is recommended to treat with long-term beta blockers (unless contraindicated) to
control heart rate and BP to reduce late aortic-related adverse events.1-7Additional antihypertensive
agents (particularly ARBs and ACEIs) should be a dded, as necessary, to adequately control BP.
Synopsis
Patients with AAS with surgical or endovascular treat-
ment need continued and long-term medical management.Controlling hypertension has consistently been shown todecrease aorta-related adverse events. Recent studies
have shown long-term bene ﬁtw i t hs p e c i ﬁc BP agents such
as beta blockers, ACEIs, and ARBs.
Recommendation Supporting Text
1. Long-term oral antihypertensive regimens that included
beta blockers, ACEIs, and ARBs have shown to improvelong-term outcomes in patients with AAS treated withboth surgical and endovascular treatments.
1-4Although
calcium channel blockers showed some bene ﬁti np a -
tients with type B aortic dissection, further studies inm o u s em o d e l so fM a r f a ns y n d r o m ea sw e l la sc a s e
control studies in Marfan syndrome and other inheritedaortopathy patients in the GenTAC (Genetically Trig-gered Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms and CardiovascularConditions) registry showed deleterious effects of long-
term calcium channel blocker use and, consequently, it
may be best to avoid these agents in patients withMarfan syndrome unless necessary to achieve BPcontrol.
8
7.4. Surgical and Endovascular Management of Acute Aortic
Dissection
The primary goals of open surgical or endovascular stent-
graft repair for acute aortic dissection are to prevent (ortreat) aortic rupture, prevent retrograde extension of theJACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee307

dissection into the aortic root, prevent antegrade propa-
gation of the dissection into distal yet undissected seg-ments, and alleviate malperfusion syndromes. Acuteaortic dissection manageme nt strategies are therefore
“complication speci ﬁc,”guided by the patient ’ss i g n sa n d
symptoms, the presence or absence of complications, andthe speci ﬁc features and constraints of the patient ’sa o r t i c
a n db r a n c hv e s s e la n a t o m y( Figure 21 ).
7.4.1. Acute Type A Aortic Dissection
7.4.1.1. Initial Surgical Considerations in Acute Type A
Aortic DissectionFIGURE 21 Acute Aortic Dissection: Malp erfusion Treatment Options
AoD indicates aortic dissection; and TEVAR, thoracic endovascular aortic repair.
Recommendations for Initial Surgical Considerations in Acute Type A Aortic Dissection
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In patients presenting with suspected or con ﬁrmed acute type A aortic dissection, emergency surgical
consultation and evaluation and immediate surgical i ntervention is recommended because of the high risk
of associated life-threa tening complications.1,2
2a B-NR2. In patients presenting with acute type A aortic disse ction, who are stable enough for transfer, transfer
from a low- to a high-volume aortic cent er is reasonable to improve survival.3,4
2a B-NR3. In patients presenting with nonhemorrhagic stroke co mplicating acute type A aortic dissection, surgical
intervention is reasonable over medical therapy to reduce mortality and improve neurologic outcomes.5,6Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e308

Synopsis
Acute type A aortic dissection is a life-threatening
condition because of potential sequelae, includingrupture that causes cardiac tamponade, acute severe ARthat causes heart failure or shock, compromised coronary
artery ostia causing myocardial ischemia, or malperfusion
causing end-organ ischemia or infarction, all of which canall be fatal. Suspected or diagnosed acute type A aorticdissection warrants urgent sur gical evaluation, because
the mortality rate of medical management alone is 2 to 3times that of surgical intervention.
1Data from IRAD
showed that from 1995 to 2013, the surgical mortality ratedecreased from 25% to 18%, while the medical mortality
rate remained unchanged at 57 %. Surgical intervention
mitigates the immediate risk of aortic rupture/tampo-nade, corrects AR and myocardial ischemia, and reestab-lishes ﬂow to malperfused vessels.
Nevertheless, the bene ﬁts of surgery must be weighed
against the risks of the surgery itself (ie, a demanding,complex operation in patients who often are physiologi-cally compromised). Universally recognized risk factors
that increase the surgical mortality rate include shock and
tamponade, neurologic or visceral malperfusion, andpreoperative myocardial ischemia.
7-9Although age is a
risk factor, elderly patients still bene ﬁt from surgery, with
superior immediate and midterm outcomes comparedwith medical therapy.
10,11Short- and midterm outcomes
can be equivalent to younger populations,12,13with cir-
culatory collapse being the primary predictor of long-term
survival.14In patients with signi ﬁcant contraindications
to surgery, including frailty, clinical judgment maydetermine that the risk-bene ﬁtr a t i of a v o r sm e d i c a l
management.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. The potential sequelae of acute type A aortic dissec-
tion, including myocardial infarction, acute AR, cardiac
tamponade, aortic rupture, and end-organ malperfu-
sion, are associated with high rates of morbidity andmortality. Given the acuity, unpredictability, and ﬁ-
nality of such events, immediate evaluation for surgi-cal intervention is warranted to reverse any ongoingphysiologic compromise and mitigate the risk of fatalevents. The mortality rate of unoperated acute type Aaortic dissection is 1%/h,
15and the time intervals be-
tween symptom onset, diagnosis, and surgery have a
signi ﬁcant effect, with the highest mortality rateoccurring in those undergoing surgery 8 to 12 hours
after diagnosis.16Patients presenting with clinical in-
dicators of severe physiologic compromise (shock,neurologic de ﬁcits, malperfusion, myocardial
ischemia) mandate the most immediate consideration
for repair as the only potential option for survival.
2. Patients with acute type A aortic dissection who pre-
sent with hemodynamic sta bility have an unpredict-
able course because of the inability to predict eventualrupture. Although some st udies have suggested that
night-time surgery is associated with a higher mortalityrate,
17,18other studies have shown no diurnal differ-
ence in outcomes,19,20and all studies have shown no
difference with weekend surgery. Surgeon and center
experience and resource availability should beconsidered to ensure optimal outcomes. Despite aninherent delay in the start time of surgery, transferfrom low- to high-volume hospitals (one thatperforms $7 aortic root, ascending aorta, or transverse
arch aortic dissection repairs per year),
3as part of
regionalization of care, can result in signi ﬁcantly
improved outcomes.3
3. In patients with cerebral malperfusion, survival is su-
perior with surgery; in pati e n t sw i t ha c u t et y p eAa o r t i c
dissection and an acute stroke, the mortality rates ofsurgical versus medical management are 25% to 27%versus 76%, respectively.
5,21Even more strikingly,
Estrera et al showed that patients with acute type Aaortic dissection who had presented with stroke had an
operative mortality rate of only 7% and showed no
worsening of neurologic status postoperatively.
6
Although their study and others,6,22have emphasized
the timeliness of the aortic repair in stroke patients,with a cutoff of w5t o1 0h o u r s( a f t e rw h i c hn e u r o l o g i c
outcomes declined), Fischbein et al
23found no associ-
ation between postoperativ e neurologic improvement
and time from onset of neurologic symptoms to sur-
gery. IRAD data revealed that cerebrovascular accident
and coma resolved in 84% and 79% of patients,respectively, despite mean times to surgery of 12.3 and13.8 hours, respectively.
24It should be noted, however,
that in 1 recent report of 11 patients with acute type Aaortic dissection and complete occlusion of an internalcarotid artery, all died from cerebral edema and her-niation, regardless of management
25;c o n s e q u e n t l y ,
this particular subset of patients may not bene ﬁtf r o m
surgical intervention.JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee309

7.4.1.2. Management of Malperfusion
Synopsis
Imaging evidence of malperfusion is present in as
many as 25% of patients with acute type A aortic dissec-tion but should be distinguished from clinical evidence of
end-organ ischemia, which is often referred to as mal-
perfusion syndrome ( Table 26 ). Malperfusion syndrome is
associated with a mortality rate of 30.5%, compared witha mortality rate of only 6.2% in those without malperfu-sion syndrome.
2Mortality rate correlates with the number
of branch artery vessels involved1as well as the number
of malperfused organs.7The combination of pulse de ﬁcits
(a marker of malperfusion) and hypotension should
prompt timely interventions to reestablish vital organ
perfusion, because early reperfusion predicts survival.8
The traditional approach to reestablish branch vesselperfusion has been via central aortic repair (ie, at theproximal aortic tear site). However, cardiac and visceralmalperfusion portend extremely poor outcomes given thehigh mortality rate associated with irreversible organdamage. More recent series showed potential to improve
outcomes by establishing end-organ perfusion using
endovascular means, before open central aortic repair(with the timing of subsequent open repair decided on acase-by-case basis).
5,8These procedures may be per-
formed in a hybrid operating room if the requisite re-sources and personnel are available.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. In the presence of malperfusion, operative mortality
rate correlates with the number of malperfused organs.Central aortic repair as the primary strategy to restore
perfusion has reasonab le results when renalmalperfusion, extremity malperfusion, uncomplicated
mesenteric malperfusion, or all of them is present.
9
This strategy rapidly mitigates the risk of aorticrupture and corrects any associated coronary malper-fusion, AR, and the sequelae of tamponade. After
central aortic repair, any residual malperfusion should
be assessed with secondary interventions, as needed.
2. Mesenteric malperfusion is one of the worst compli-
cations of acute type A aortic dissection, with anassociated mortality rate of 63.2%.
1Consequently, such
patients are often managed with medical therapyalone; yet, in IRAD, the near ly one-third of patients
with mesenteric ischemia who were treated without
intervention had an in-hospital mortality rate of 95%.
10
For patients with acute type A aortic dissection who
present with clinical eviden ce of mesenteric ischemia,
some centers3,4have advocated early direct reperfu-
sion strategies (whether via endovascular or openabdominal surgery
11), before central aortic repair; other
centers continue to advocate for the traditional strat-egy of central aortic repair ﬁrst.
1,2Currently, data are
limited to help de ﬁne the best strategy. In IRAD, a
surgical and hybrid strategy appears to have superioroutcome to medical or endovascular therapy alone. Aninstitution series of endovascular therapy ﬁrst showed
a low aortic repair operative mortality rate of 2.1%;however, only 58% of the cohort underwent openr e p a i r ,w i t h2 4 %d y i n gf r o mo rgan failure and 13% from
aortic rupture. Moreover ,a ne n d o v a s c u l a rt h e r a p y ﬁrst
approach requires expertise in fenestration, to treat
dynamic obstruction, and branch stenting, to treatstatic malperfusion.
5Recommendations for Management of Malperfusion
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In patients with acute type A aortic dissection presenting with renal, mesenteric, or lower extremity
malperfusion, it is recommended to proceed to imme diate operative repair of the ascending aorta.1,2
2a C-LD2. In patients with acute type A aortic dissection presenting with clinically signi ﬁcant mesenteric (celiac,
SMA) malperfusion, either immediat e operative repair of the ascendi ng aorta or immediate mesenteric
revascularization via endovascular or open surgical intervention by those with this expertise before
ascending aortic repair is reasonable.3-6
TABLE 26 Clinical Evidence of Malperfusion ( “Malperfusion Syndrome ”)
End Organ Clinical Findings
Cardiac Electrocardiographic changes of ischemia or infarction, troponin elevation, myocardial dysfunction
Cerebral Stroke and neurologic de ﬁcits, coma and altered mental status
Spinal ParaplegiaMesenteric Abdominal pain, bowel ischemia, lactic acidosis, elevation of liver function test results
Renal Acute kidney injury, oliguria
Extremity Loss of pulses in $1 extremity, sensory or motor dysfunctionIsselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e310

7.4.1.3. Surgical Repair Strategies in Acute Type A Aortic
Dissection
Synopsis
T or e d u c et h er i s ko fl a t ea o r t i cc o m p l i c a t i o n s ,s u r g i c a l
resection should include the tear site, any aneurysmalaorta, and the proximal-most extent of the dissection. A
nonresected primary tear is a r isk factor for reoperation.
32
A more extensive replacement that involves the aortic
root, arch, or both adds operative complexity, ischemictime, and potentially circulatory arrest time but mayreduce the risk of future aortic dilation, aortic insuf ﬁ-
ciency, or repeat dissection. An individualized approachto aortic root management is based on pathology and
general condition. Younger patients are more likely tohave proximal extension or root involvement and mayhave greater potential for late complications, given their
longer life expectancy. VSRR has been described with
excellent outcomes, but long-term reoperative risk is aconcern.
33
Similarly, untreated aortic arch or descending thoracic
aortic tissue may be at risk of aneurysmal enlargementand the need for reintervention, particularly with acuteRecommendations for Surgical Repair Strategies in Acute Type A Aortic Dissection
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
Aortic Repair Strategies
1 B-NR1. In patients with acute type A aortic dissection and a partially dissected aortic root but no signi ﬁcant aortic
valve lea ﬂet pathology, aortic valve resuspension i s recommended over valve replacement.1-5
1 B-NR2. In patients with acute type A aortic dissection who h ave extensive destruction of the aortic root, a root
aneurysm, or a known genetic aortic disorder, aortic root replacement is recommended with a mechanicalor biological valved conduit.
6-9
2b C-LDIn selected patients who are stable, valve-sparin g root repair may be reasonable, when performed by
experienced surgeons in a Multidisciplinary Aortic Team.10,11
1 B-NR3. In patients with acute type A aortic dissection unde rgoing aortic repair, an open distal anastomosis is
recommended to improve survival and increase false-lumen thrombosis rates.12-15
1 B-NR4. In patients with acute type A aortic dissection without an intimal tear in the arch or a signi ﬁcant arch
aneurysm, hemiarch repair is recommended over more extensive arch replacement.16-18
2b C-LD5. In patients with acute type A aortic dissection and a dissection ﬂap extending through the arch into the
descending thoracic aorta, an extended aortic repair with antegrade stenting of the proximal descendingthoracic aorta may be considered to treat malperfusi on and reduce late distal aortic complications.
19,20
Perfusion and Cannu lation Strategies
2a B-NR6. In patients with acute type A aortic dissection unde rgoing surgical repair, axillary cannulation, when
feasible, is reasonable over femoral cannulati on to reduce the risk of stroke or retrograde
malperfusion.21,22
2a B-NR7. In patients with acute type A aortic dissection underg oing surgical repair who require circulatory arrest,
cerebral perfusion is reasonable to improve neurologic outcomes.23-25
2a B-NR8. In patients with acute type A aortic dissectio n undergoing surgical repair, direct aortic26,27or innominate
artery28cannulation with imaging guidance is reasonabl e as an alternative to femoral or axillary can-
nulation.29-31JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee311

type A aortic dissection that extends into the descending
thoracic aorta. An open distal anastomosis allows directarch inspection for intimal tears and resection of the
lesser curve of the arch (ie, hemiarch technique) withoutincreased operative death.
12,13,34In-hospital death is
l o w e rw i t hh e m i a r c hr e p a i rt h a nw i t ht o t a la r c hr e p l a c e -
ment. Antegrade stenting of the proximal descendingthoracic aorta may promote false-lumen thrombosis andpositive remodeling,
35-37but long-term aortic-related
data are scarce.
Involvement of the aortic arch by the aortic dissection
can in ﬂuence both interventional strategies and clinical
outcomes. Various interven tional approaches, such as
extended open arch replacement (with or without a
frozen elephant trunk),44hybrid techniques, or endo-
vascular stenting have been described.38-40Aortic arch
exclusion with emerging endovascular stents graft de-v i c e si sa ﬁeld in evolution.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Most single-center retrospective studies and an IRAD
study found no difference in perioperative mortality or
survival when comparing root replacement with amore limited root repair or supracommissuralreplacement.
2,5,7,41,42However, a standardized and
structured algorithmic approach showed a mortalityrate of only 8.1% with aortic valve resuspension as thepreferred approach, whenever feasible, compared with23.1% with root replacement.
43Studies on freedom
from reoperation are mixed,1,7,41,44-46but 2 meta-
analyses have shown excellent long-term durabilityof aortic valve resuspension, with reoperation rates1.4% to 2.1% per patient-year and low thromboembo-lism and bleeding rates (1.4%/patient-year).
3,4
2. An aneurysmal root at the time of acute type A aortic
dissection repair is at long-term risk of progressive rootdilation, secondary aortic insuf ﬁciency, and the need
for reoperation. Speci ﬁcally, an aortic root diameter of
>4.5 cm has been shown to be a risk factor for late
reintervention.
6A valved conduit is one option for root
replacement but, if the aortic valve lea ﬂet quality is
good, the aortic insuf ﬁciency is primarily attributable
to sinus dilation, and the surgeon is experienced inV S R R ,aV S R Rm a yb er e a s o n a b l ef o ry o u n g e rp a t i e n t s .
3. In the development of the IRAD risk score, right hem-
iarch replacement was an independent predictor for a
favorable surgical outcome.
15NORCAAD (Nordic Con-
s o r t i u mf o rA c u t eT y p eAA o r t i cD i s s e c t i o n )f o u n dt h a tthe open-distal technique was associated with bettershort- and midterm survival than the clamp-on tech-nique, although it was also associated with greaterrates of cerebrovascular complications.
12Lawton et al14
found superior survival when all 3 components —no
cross-clamp use, deep hypothermic circulatory arrest,and only antegrade perfusion after aortic perfusion —
were used, compared with the absence of any of thesecomponents. Open distal anastomosis is also associ-ated with higher rates of complete false-lumenthrombosis.
13
4. Single-institution study ﬁndings that total arch
replacement (TAR) is safe and promotes aortic remod-eling
47,48have not been resulted in larger studies.
GERAADA (German Registry for Acute Aortic DissectionT y p eA )f o u n dat r e n dt o w a r dl o w e rm o r t a l i t yr a t e swith hemiarch versus TAR (18.7% versus 25.7%;P¼0.07); higher rates of excessive bleeding and
rethoracotomy in the total arch group; and, in patients
without preoperative neurologic de ﬁcits, lower mor-
tality rates for hemiarch than TAR (14.1% versus 24%,respectively; P¼0.02).
49A n STS database study of 12
years of acute type A aortic dissection repairs showedsigni ﬁc a n t l yl o w e ro p e r a t i v ed e a t hw i t hh e m i a r c ht h a n
with TAR (16% versus 27%; P<0.001).
50Two meta-
analyses have found signi ﬁcantly lower mortality
rates with partial compared with TAR.16,18Across 3
meta-analyses, the long-term freedom from aortic
reoperation does not appear to be necessarily superiorwith TAR.
16-18
5. Comparative data on use of antegrade stenting of the
descending thoracic aorta in the setting of surgicalacute type A aortic dissection repair are limited. Inseveral noncomparative meta-analyses, the mortalityrate was w8 %t o1 2 % ,t h es t r o k er a t ew a s5 %t o7 % ,a n d
the SCI rate was 2% to 3.5%.
36,51,52False-lumen
thrombosis rates a ppear favorable,35but the reinter-
vention rate was not zero, and the long-term bene ﬁt
for aortic reoperation or aortic-related mortalityremained unde ﬁned. In a series that included 19 pa-
tients with DeBakey type I acute type A aortic dissec-tion and clinical malperfusion, antegrade stenting wasassociated with resolution of malperfusion in 16 pa-
tients (84.2%).
19In patients requiring total arch
replacement, a frozen elephant trunk has higheradverse events in acute type A aortic dissection than inelective repairs. The stent length should be <15 cm
and, to avoid SCI, coverage should not extend to T8.
53
6. An STS database study50and 2 meta-analyses21,22have
found an increased risk of stroke and short-term mor-tality with femoral compared with axillary cannula-
tion. However, femoral cannulation is more expedient
and is considered the primary arterial site in patientswith hemodynamic instab ility mandating immediate
cannulation, or with anatomic features precludingaxillary cannulation. If initial femoral cannulation isrequired for these reasons, it is recommended to cen-trally canulate after the distal anastomosis has beencompleted, to maximize reestablishment of true lumen
ﬂow.Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e312

7. Some form of cerebral perfusion, whether antegrade or
retrograde, has been shown to improve neurologicoutcomes, when compared with deep hypothermiccirculatory arrest alone.
23Antegrade cerebral perfusion
is associated with both lowe r long-term mortality rates
and neurologic dysfunction rates. Unilateral and
bilateral antegrade cerebr al perfusion appear to have
similar outcomes, except in cases of prolonged circu-latory arrest ( >30–50 minutes), in which case bilateral
antegrade cerebral perfusion may be advanta-geous.
24,54-56
8. Several series for surgery for acute type A aortic
dissection have reported direct aortic cannulation us-
ing a TEE-guided Seldinger technique. When per-
formed correctly, this technique has the bene ﬁto f
rapid establishment of cardiopulmonary bypass withtrue lumen ﬂow. However, when the patient is stable,its safety relative to axillary cannulation is controver-
sial,
57b e c a u s es t r o k er a t e sw i t ht h i st e c h n i q u ea r ea s
high as 20% in some series.29Rosinski et al found that
patients undergoing direct aortic cannulation weremore hemodynamically unstable and had more
extended repairs; however, even in multivariable
logistic regression, it was associated with a higherrisk of stroke (OR, 2.3; 95% CI, 1.05 –5.1) Further, cere-
bral perfusion by some means other than axillaryperfusion will be required for longer circulatory arrestcases. Innominate artery cannulation is another optionthat provides access for antegrade cerebral perfusionand appears to be safe in acute type A aortic
dissection.
58-60
7.4.2. Management of Acute Type B Aortic Dissection
Recommendations for the Management of Acute Type B Aortic Dissection
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In all patients with uncomplicated acute type B aort ic dissection, medical therapy is recommended as the
initial management strategy.1-3
1 C-LD2. In patients with acute type B aortic dissec tion and rupture or other complications ( Table 27 ), intervention
is recommended.4-6
1 C-EOIn patients with rupture, in the presence of suitable a natomy, endovascular stent grafting, rather than
open surgical repair, is recommended.
2a C-LDIn patients with other complications, in the pres ence of suitable anatomy, the use of endovascular
approaches, rather than open sur gical repair, is reasonable.4-6,7
2b B-R3. In patients with uncomplicated acute type B aorti c dissection who have high-risk anatomic features
(Table 28 ), endovascular management may be considered.8,9
Synopsis
Although acute complicated type B aortic dissection
historically has been treate dw i t ho p e nr e p a i r ,e n d o v a s -
cular therapy has largely supplanted open repair givenlower morbidity and mortality rates. Additionally, optimal
medical management was associated with a 30-day mor-
tality rate of 10% and midterm mortality rate of approxi-mately 30%. The introduction of endovascular techniqueshas resulted in signi ﬁcantly lower morbidity and mortality
rates when compared with optimal medical management,reported in small randomized trials including ADSORB(Acute Dissection: Stent graft OR Best medical therapy)
8
and INSTEAD (Investigation of Stent Grafts in Patients
with Type B Aortic Dissection)10; to date, there has notbeen a large RCT comparing open versus endovascular
repair for either complicated or uncomplicated type Baortic dissection.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁcS u p p o r t i v eT e x t
1. Those patients with type B aortic dissection generally
have better survival than those with type A aorticdissection. In the acute uncomplicated setting, medicalmanagement is the ﬁrst mode of therapy for type B
aortic dissection. A review of the IRAD database showedoverall in-hospital mortality rate of 13%, with thoserequiring open repair having higher mortality ratesc o m p a r e dw i t ht h o s em a n a g e dw i t ho p t i m a lm e d i c a l
management and percutaneous intervention (32.1%JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee313

versus 9.6% versus 6.5%, respectively; P<0.0001).1
Without intervention, ri sk factors for early death
include shock, evidence of malperfusion, and age1-3
and can be grouped together with uncontrollable hy-pertension, pain, and continued growth or extension ofthe dissection as a complicated type B aortic dissection.
2. Patients presenting with complicated acute type B
aortic dissection ( Table 27 ), or developing such features
after initial presentation, have an increased risk ofmorbidity and death, and urgent or emergency inter-vention may be required. For rupture, rapid coverage
of the affected region of the descending aorta may be
lifesaving and does not preclude subsequent furtherendovascular or open repair. This is an importantconsideration in those patients with genetically trig-gered aortic diseases (eg, Marfan syndrome, Loeys-Dietz syndrome). Cambria et al
11reviewed the out-
c o m e sf o rA A Sm a n a g e dw i t hT E V A Rc o m p a r e dw i t hhistoric controls and found a 1-year survival rate of 79%
for acute type B aortic dissection treated endovascu-
larly. A subsequent singl e-arm study of patients
t r e a t e dw i t hT E V A Rf o u n da3 0 - d a ym o r t a l i t yr a t eo f8% and 1-year survival rate of 88%.
4The VIRTUE
Registry investigators5found a bene ﬁt to early inter-
vention but with reintervention rates of 20% to 39%.The RESTORE Patient Registry had similar results.
6Fenestration may be required if TEVAR alone doesnot correct the malperfusio n, and visceral or renal ar-
tery stenting may also be required. When intervention
is an emergency, TEVAR has a signi ﬁcantly lower
morbidity and in-hospital mortality rates comparedwith open repair, with the greatest advantage amongolder patients.
12
3. With medical management of uncomplicated type B
aortic dissection still having a 30-day mortality rate of10% and a decreased long-term survival, interest re-mains in determining if earl y endovascular interven-
tion might reduce the risk of downstream complication
or negative aortic remodeling, particularly in patientswith high-risk features. In the ADSORB trial,
8which
compared optimal medical management vs. optimalmedical management plus TEVAR, there were no earlydeaths in either group and, at 1-year follow-up, therewas just 1 death in the TEVAR group. TEVAR was su-perior to optimal medical management alone with
signi ﬁcant differences in incomplete or no false-lumen
thrombosis, aortic dilation, and rupture, but the pri-mary clinical bene ﬁts are unknown. In the INSTEAD-XL
(Investigation of Stent-grafts in Aortic Dissection)trial,
13in patients with uncomplicated type B aortic
dissection, prophylactic T EVAR plus optimal medical
was associated with improved 5-year aorta-speci ﬁcTABLE 27 Consensus Features of Complicat ed Acute Type B Aortic Dissection
Feature Comment
Aortic rupture1This can be either free or contained (including hemothorax, increasing periaortic hematoma, or both; or mediastinal
hematoma) and should be addressed promptly.
Branch artery occlusion and malperfusion2Complete or partial occlusion of a major branch, with or without clinical evidence of ischemia; this includes visceral, renal,
and peripheral arterial branches.
Extension of dissection3Extension of the dissection ﬂap either distally or proximally (ie, retrograde type A dissection)
Aortic enlargement Progressive enlargement of the true, false, or both lumens while in the acute phase may require prompt intervention.
Intractable pain15
Uncontrolled hypertension15
TABLE 28 High-Risk Features in Uncomplicat ed Acute Type B Aortic Dissection9
High-Risk Imaging Findings
Maximal aortic diameter >40 mm
False-lumen diameter >20–22 mm
Entry tear >10 mm
Entry tear on lesser curvature
Increase in total aortic diameter of >5 mm between serial imaging studies
Bloody pleural effusionImaging-only evidence of malperfusionHigh-Risk Clinical Findings
Refractory hypertension despite >3 different classes of antihypertensive medications at maximal recommended or tolerated doses
Refractory pain persisting >12 h despite maximal recommended or tolerated doses
Need for readmissionIsselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e314

survival and delayed disease progression. As the long-
term mortality rate for type B aortic dissection that ismanaged medically and is strongly related to aorticevents, the ﬁndings from the ADSORB and INSTEAD-XL
trials appear promising, but larger trials with longer-
term data are still needed. What remains unknown is
the optimal timing for TEVAR.
14Features associatedwith an increased need for future intervention are
summarized in Table 28 .9
7.5. Management of IMH
Recommendations for Management of IMH
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In patients with complicated ( Table 29 ) acute type A or type B aortic IMH, urgent repair is recom-
mended.1-3
1 B-NR2. In patients with uncomplicated acute type A IMH , prompt open surgical repair is recommended.1,4-6
2b C-LDIn selected patients with uncomplicated acute type A IMH who are at increased operative risk and do not
have high-risk imaging features ( Table 30 ), an initial or expectant approach of medical management
may be considered.6-12
1 B-NR3. In patients with uncomplicated acute type B IMH, med ical therapy as the initial management strategy is
recommended.1-3,13
2a C-LD4. In patients with type B IMH who require repair of the distal aortic arch or descending thoracic aorta
(zones 2-5) and have favorable anatomy, endovascul ar repair is reasonable when performed by surgeons
with endovascular expertise.2,14
2a C-LD5. In patients with type B IMH who require repair of the distal aortic arch or descending thoracic aorta
(zones 2-5) and have unfavorable anatomy for endovas cular repair, open surgical repair is reasonable.2,3
2b C-LD6. In patients with uncomplicated type B IMH and high-risk imaging features ( Table 30 ), intervention may
be reasonable.13-16
Synopsis
Aortic IMH is a distinct pathologic entity from aortic
dissection and PAU. It is cha racterized by hemorrhage
within the media of the aortic wall and may occur with orwithout intimal disruption. Radiographically, IMH ap-
pears as a high-attenuation crescentic or circumferential
thickening of the aorta on noncontrast imaging, withabsence of blood ﬂow through a false lumen on contrast
imaging. IMH occurs more commonly in the descendingthoracic aorta (60%) than in the ascending aorta (30%) oraortic arch (10%).
1Classi ﬁc a t i o ni st h es a m ea si su s e df o r
acute aortic dissection. Symptoms at presentation aresimilar to aortic dissection, but patients tend to be older
and more often have hypertension and atherosclerosis.
1,2
Malperfusion can occur but less frequently than in aortic
dissection.1,2IMH can progress to aortic enlargement,aortic dissection, or aortic rupture; alternatively, the he-
matoma can sometimes be resorbed.3Of patients pre-
senting with AAS, the proportion who have IMH variesbased by region, with reports of 6% to 23% in NorthAmerica and Europe
1,6versus 26% to 44% in Asia.4,5,12
The management strategy for IMH balances patient
comorbidities, the differing lethality of type A and type BIMH, mortality and death associated with open or endo-vascular repair in the different segments of the aorta, andthe risk of aortic-related complications with medicalmanagement. Prospective randomized comparativestudies are lacking, and most series and registries arelimited by small sample sizes. For recommendations
regarding management of IMH in association with PAU,
seeSection 7.6 ,“Management of Penetrating Atheroscle-
rotic Ulcer (PAU). ”JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee315

Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. IMH, especially type A IMH, can be a lethal condition,
complicated by rupture at presentation in 18% and, inthat setting, associated with 100% mortality ratewithout surgical intervention.
3The features of com-
plications of IMH are summarized in Table 29 .
2. A nonoperative strategy for type A IMH is associated
with a mortality rate as high as 40%, according to theﬁndings of the IRAD.
1Progression to aortic dissection,
rupture, or other aorta-related adverse events occurs in
14% to 37% of patients, with most events occurringwithin the acute or subacute phase.
12,17,18In-hospital
mortality (1% –27%)1,4,6and mid- and long-term sur-
vival4-6after operative repair for type A IMH are
reasonable and comparable to or better than survivalrates reported for type A aortic dissection. There arevaried approaches to timing of surgery, with low
mortality rate achieved with strategies of repair within
24 hours
5and slightly delayed repair (between 24 and
72 hours), when feasible.6The slight delay may confer
an advantage by allowing the hematoma to form andthe tissue quality of the aorta to improve. In addition,the extra time can allow for further diagnostic evalu-ation, optimization of comorbidities, or clearance ofnovel oral anticoagulant medications, which may
improve outcomes. Delay is only reasonable in stable
patients. The experience with successful medicalmanagement of type A IMH is mostly from Japan, Ko-rea, and China, all reporting outcomes better thanthose reported in North America and Europe; the dif-ferences might be related to genetic or environmentalfactors that affect IMH natural history, so the Asianresults may not be generalizable to other ethnic or
geographic patient populations. The approach varies
from initial medical management with planned“timely ”(ranging from within a few days to before
discharge) surgery to expec tant medical management
with surgical intervention only for complications ordisease progression.
7-12One meta-analysis showed
acceptable pooled proportion of an all-cause in-hospi-tal mortality rate of 7% and 30-day mortality rate of
15%
8with initial medical management. Another meta-
analysis, comparing upfront surgery to initial medicalmanagement with “timely ”surgery, showed no sig-
niﬁcant difference in short-term survival (although an
overall operative approach to type A IMH did show asurvival bene ﬁt over medical therapy alone).
9For pa-
tients at increased operative risk (eg, advanced age,poor baseline renal function, coronary artery disease),
medical management may therefore be an option.
There are several high-risk imaging features ( Table 30 )
that predict poor outcome (death, need for surgicalintervention, or both) with this strategy. Shareddecision-making with the pa tient should include dis-
cussion regarding need for an extended hospital stay of2 to 3 weeks, including $3d a y si nt h eI C Uo nb e d r e s t ,
with perhaps $5 CTAs during the hospitalization for
close monitoring because of the dynamic disease pro-cess and moderate to high risk of progression to aorticdissection and rupture.
3. Type B IMH may have a more benign prognosis than
type A IMH, resulting in relatively low in-hospitalmortality rate (4% –6%) with medical management
and 9% mortality rate at 1-year follow-up.
1,2As t r a t e g y
of medical management for type B IMH with surgical
intervention for severe recurrent symptoms or radio-graphic worsening on follow-up was associated withacceptable long-term survival.
3Intervention, whether
surgical or endovascular, has associated mortality andmorbidity. Although signi ﬁcantly less dissection and
rupture may be observed during follow-up withTEVAR, compared with optimal medical therapy, this
may
17or may not13,14translate into improved aortic-
related outcomes.
4. Literature supporting end ovascular treatment of IMH
is limited mainly to experience with TEVAR for IMH inthe setting of PAU, or TEVAR for mixed type B AASincluding IMH; the perioperative mortality rate fortreatment of acute IMH ranges from 0% to 29%. Ofnote, in PAU with IMH or IMH with ulcer-like projec-
tion, endovascular treatment can be guided by the
focal lesion. IMH with multiple ulcer-like projectionsmay require more extensive treatment length. Favor-able anatomy for TEVAR would include ideally normalaorta at both proximal and distal landing zones or, atleast at the proximal landing zone, as outward tensionof the stent graft transferred to abnormal aortic wallcan lead to stent-induced new entry tear and subse-
quent aneurysmal degeneration or aortic dissection. In
general, stent graft oversizing usually does not exceed10%, and balloon aortoplasty at the landing zones isavoided. The experience with TEVAR for retrogradetype A IMH associated with a distal intimal defect (ie,distal arch or descending thoracic aorta) is limited tosmall case reports and series. With the higher inci-dence of atherosclerotic disease in patients with IMHTABLE 29 Features of Complicated IMH
Feature
nMalperfusion
nPeriaortic hematoma
nPericardial effusion with cardiac tamponade
nPersistent, refractory, or recurrent pain
nRupture
IMH indicates intramural hematoma.Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e316

compared with aortic dissection, adequate vessel
diameter for endovascular access should be deter-
mined as well.
5. In the IRAD experience for type B IMH, open surgical
repair was performed in 5%, endovascular repair in 7%,and a hybrid approach in 1%, with no difference inresults.
1Good outcomes have been reported for open
repair,3,19despite the more invasive approach. Open
surgical repair may be preferable when IMH extends tothe proximal landing zone of anticipated endovascular
coverage, the aortic diamet er at the proximal or distal
extent of planned coverage is too large to accommo-date existing stent graft sizes, the hematoma or aneu-rysm extends into the aortic arch and circulatory arrest
would facilitate resection of diseased aorta, or endo-vascular access for stent deployment is anticipated tobe inadequate.
6. High-risk imaging features may be present on admis-
sion or may develop in the acute, subacute, or chronic
phases. Ulcer-like projections and focal intimaldisruption (FID) are both terms that describe a focaloutpouching of contrast arising from the lumen of the
aorta in the setting of IMH with no associated athero-
sclerotic plaque. FID is more speci ﬁcally de ﬁned by its
communicating ori ﬁce measuring >3 mm, while tiny
intimal disruption has a communicating ori ﬁce#3
mm.
15FID occurs in 32% of type B IMH and signi ﬁ-
cantly predicts cardiovascul ar- or aorta-related death
and aorta-related events,15,16,18especially when it de-
velops in the acute, rather than chronic, phase.15Tiny
intimal disruptions are lower risk and considered a
benign ﬁnding.16As 40% of patients can develop FID
that was not present on the initial study,15early sur-
veillance imaging can help identify patients at risk forcomplications. Table 30 summarizes these and other
high-risk imaging features of IMH.
7.6. Management of PAU
7.6.1. PAU With IMH, Rupture, or BothTABLE 30 High-Risk Imaging Features of IMH
For Type A IMH For Type B IMH
nMaximum aortic diameter >45–50 mm18,20nMaximum aortic diameter >47–50 mm15,20
nHematoma thickness $10 mm4nHematoma thickness $13 mm15
nFocal intimal disruption with ul cer-like projection involving
ascending aorta or arch18,21nFocal intimal disruption with ulcer-like pr ojection involving the descending thoracic
aorta if it develops in acute phase15,16
nPericardial effusion on admission18nIncreasing or recurrent pleural effusion19,22
F o rB o t hT y p eAa n dT y p eBI M H
nP r o g r e s s i o nt oa o r t i cd i s s e c t i o n19
nIncreasing aortic diameter21,22
nIncreasing hematoma thickness21,22
IMH indicates intramural hematoma.
Recommendations for PAU With IMH, Rupture, or Both
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In patients with PAU of the aorta with rupture, urgent repair is recommended.1-3
1 B-NR2. In patients with PAU of the ascending aorta with associated IMH, urgent repair is recommended.1-3
2a C-LD3. In patients with PAU of the aortic arch or descending thoracic aorta with associated IMH, urgent repair is
reasonable.1-3
2b C-LD4. In patients with PAU of the abdominal aorta with associated IMH, urgent repair may be considered.4JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee317

Synopsis
A PAU is an atherosclerotic lesion of the aorta with
ulceration that penetrates th e internal elastic lamina and
allows hematoma formation within the media of theaortic wall.
5PAUs may progress to AAS with IMH forma-
tion, aortic dissection, or rupture.1,2,6PAU with IMH is
associated with a high risk of short-term disease pro-gression,
1particularly when localized to the ascending
aorta (ie, Stanford type A).1,2Data on outcomes for PAU
with descending thoracic and abdominal aorta (ie, Stan-ford type B) IMH are limited to small retrospective re-views but suggest signi ﬁcant early disease progression
among patients treated with medical management.
1,2
PAUs tend to affect elderly patients with severe athero-
sclerotic disease and other comorbidities that put them athigh surgical risk even with en dovascular interventions,
so the risk of repair must be weighed against the risk ofsevere morbidity and patient life expectancy when mak-ing decisions about appropriate management.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. PAU with rupture that is not treated with intervention
is associated with a high mortality rate (of 5 of 17 pa-tients who presented with PAU with rupture who didnot undergo repair, none survived).
3In contrast, in 1
small series, most patients with PAU with rupturetreated by open or endovascular therapy survived tohospital discharge.
1
2. PAU of the ascending aorta is uncommon; however,
when it occurs, and in concert with IMH, the incidencerate of rupture is 33% to 75%,2,3and progression to
aortic dissection is associated with a high mortalityrate.
1
3. PAUs with type B IMH that are managed conservatively
are associated with a high risk of disease progression to
true aortic dissection or rupture.1,2In a small retro-
spective analysis of patients presenting with PAUs andtype B IMH, 3 of 17 patients (17.6%) who were managedconservatively died from progression of disease toaortic rupture at a mean of 9.3 days.
1In contrast, there
was 1 death among 14 patients (7.1%) who underwentopen (n ¼8) or endovascular (n ¼6) aortic repair for PAU
with type B IMH.
1These data support early interven-
tion of PAU in the setting of type B IMH in patients who
are reasonable surgical candidates.
4. The natural history of PAU of the abdominal aorta with
associated IMH is not well described, but lowprocedure-related and 30-day mortality rates havebeen described in several small series and case reportsof both the endovascular and surgical treatment ofabdominal aorta PAUs.
7In a literature review of 298
published cases of PAU affecting the abdominal aorta,
most authors (62.0%) reported endovascular stent graftrepair as the treatment of choice, followed by opensurgical repair (35.4%) and conservative management(2.6%).
7
7.6.2. Isolated PAU
Recommendations for Isolated PAU
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In patients with isolated PAU who are symptomatic an d have persistent pain that is clinically correlated
with the radiologic ﬁndings, repair is recommended.1-3
2b C-LD2. In patients with isolated PAU who are asympto matic but have high-risk imaging features ( Table 31 ),
elective repair may be considered.1,2,4
Synopsis
Isolated PAUs are those without associated IMH, aortic
dissection, or saccular aneurysm. Symptomatic isolatedPAUs may herald a developing peri-ulcer hematoma, IMH,or both and are more likely to progress or result in rupture
than asymptomatic PAUs.
5For patients who present with
a symptomatic PAU but whose symptoms resolve withgoal-directed therapy or patients who are poor operativecandidates at increased risk for morbidity and death fromrepair, medical management has been pursued, with earlyand frequent surveillance imaging to assess for disease
progression.
4
Asymptomatic isolated PAUs are increasingly diag-
nosed incidentally because of the increasing use of CTA.Several series that reported mid or long-term outcomes
of retrospective institutional data suggest that isolated
PAUs have radiographic progression in up to 30% ofpatients.
1-3,6,7High-quality data evaluating thresholds for
surgical repair are limited, but retrospective data haveshown that PAUs with a diameter of $13 mm to 20 mm orIsselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e318

depth of $10 mm ( Figure 22 ) are closely associated with
disease progression.1Signi ﬁcant growth rates are not well
deﬁned and depend on the size of the patient, his or her
aortic anatomy, and the presence of high-risk features
associated with PAU ( Table 31 ).
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Symptomatic PAUs are associated with a high risk of
early disease progression.2,3,5,7,8In a small series of 25
patients presenting with symptomatic PAU managedmedically, 30% had disease progression on surveillanceimaging at a mean of 18 months follow-up, includingexpansion of the PAU and new IMH in 20% and con-version to aortic dissection in 10%.
3All patients in the
series went on to require operative repair. In contem-
porary series, most patients with symptomatic PAU
without rupture have been treated with open orendovascular repair with acceptable results (seeSection 7.6.3 ,“PAU: Open Surgical Repair Versus
Endovascular Repair ”).
3,7-9
2. Asymptomatic isolated PAU with large diameter or
depth, signi ﬁcant growth on surveillance imaging, or
other high-risk features ( Table 31 ), are associated with
disease progression.1,7In contrast, incidental aorticPAUs that are asymptomatic and without high-risk
features have a low risk of progression (3.6% and6.5% at 5 and 10 years after diagnosis, respectively).
10
Maximum depth and diameter of the PAU can beused to determine lesions that would be consideredhigh risk and may be considered for intervention
(Figure 22 ).
4TABLE 31 High-Risk Imaging Features of PAUs
Feature
nMaximum PAU diameter $13–20 mm1
nMaximum PAU depth $10 mm1
nSigni ﬁcant growth of PAU diameter or depth
nPAU associated with a saccular aneurysm5
nP A Uw i t ha ni n c r e a s i n gp l e u r a le f f u s i o n1
PAU indicates penetrating atherosclerotic ulcer.FIGURE 22 Dimensions of Penetrating Atherosclerotic Ulcers
(A)Maximal aortic diameter at ulcer site diameter (from ulcer across to
opposite aortic wall). (B)Depth of intramural blood pool. (C)Length of
intimal defect at ulcer site. (D)Width of intramural blood pool.
Adapted from Gifford et al,11Copyright 2016, with permission from
Elsevier, Inc., and from Cho et al9Copyright 2004 with permission
from the Society for Vascular Surgery.JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee319

7.6.3. PAU Open Surgical Repair Versus Endovascular Repair
Synopsis
Operative repair of PAUs includes both open and
endovascular treatment. Historically, most PAUs weret r e a t e dw i t ho p e na o r t i cr e p l a c e m e n t ,a l t h o u g hm o r econtemporary series have reported good technical success
and short- and midterm outcomes after endovascular
repair in the descending and infrarenal aorta.
4-7
Comparative data are limited about the best treatmentapproach for a PAU but, in general, the approach dependson the location of the PAU, the patient ’sa o r t i ca n db r a n c h
vessel anatomy, associated pathology, and patientcomorbidities (because these patients tend to be olderand have signi ﬁcant atherosclerosis).
4Procedure-related
and in-hospital death are lower for patients treated with
an endovascular approach, although available data arebased on small studies with a high risk of treatment bias.
4
Midterm outcomes after endovascular repair of PAU haveshown a 4% to 8% risk of endoleak
4,7and a 5% risk of new
PAU formation.7One-year mortality rates for patients
treated with endovascular versus open repair are similar.7
Results of open surgical repair in patients with
ascending aortic PAU are limited to small case series.8-11
Despite this, open repair remains the gold standard for
treating AAS that involve the ascending aorta andproximal arch, with acceptable morbidity and mortality
rates compared with medical therapy.12,13
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Results of open surgical repair of the ascending aorta
and proximal arch can be reasonably applied to PAU.
Cases have been reported in which ascending aortics t e n t i n gh a sb e e np e r f o r m e dw i t hs u r g e o n - m o d i ﬁed
stent-grafts or off-label use of commercially availabledevices, but currently there is no FDA-approved devicef o re n d o v a s c u l a rr e p a i ro ft h ea s c e n d i n ga o r t ao rproximal arch.
2. The risk of procedure-relat ed and in-hospital death is
lower for endovascular compared with open repair of
PAU in the descending thoracic and abdominal aorta,although longer-term data are similar for both opera-tive approaches.
4
7.7. Traumatic Aortic Injury
7.7.1. Initial Management of Blunt Traumatic Thoracic Aortic
Injury (BTTAI)
7.7.1.1. Initial Management of BTTAI in the Emergency
DepartmentRecommendations for PAU Open Surgical Repair Versus Endovascular Repair
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 C-LD1. In patients who require repair of a PAU in the ascen ding aorta or proximal aortic arch (zones 0-1), open
surgical repair is recommended.
2a C-LD2. In patients who require repair of a PAU in the distal aortic arch (zones 2-3), descending thoracic aorta, or
abdominal aorta, either open surgical repair1-3or endovascular repair is reasonable, based on anatomy
and medical comorbidities.4-6
Recommendations for Initial Management of BTTAI in the Emergency Department
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 C-EO1. In patients with BTTAI, management and treatment at a trauma center with the facilities and expertise to
treat aortic pathology is recommended.
1 C-LD2. In patients with BTTAI, anti-impulse therapy to red uce the risk of injury extension and rupture should be
implemented, except in patients with hypotension or hypovolemic shock.1,2Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e320

Synopsis
BTTAI, although rare, is the second-most common
cause of death in trauma patients; it results from highdeceleration forces and is often associated with concom-itant injuries. In the ACS National Trauma Databank, the
diagnosis of BTTAI increased 196.8% from 2003 to 2013,
likely attributable to more sensitive imaging.
3The mor-
tality rate of patients with BTTAI who were treated in theemergency department was w19%.
4,5Initial management
of polytrauma at trauma centers follows AdvancedTrauma Life Support protocols. However, for patientswith BTTAI, special attention to BP and heart rate iswarranted because of their effects on injury extension
and rupture.
In stable patients, the 2011 Society for Vascular
Surgery clinical practice guidelines
6suggested urgent
(<24 h) repair barring other serious concomitant
nonaortic injuries or immediately after treatment ofother injuries. Optimal timing of intervention, how-ever, remains unclear. In a recent study from theNational Trauma Data Bank, early ( <24 h) repair had
increased odds of death (adjusted OR, 2.39; 95% CI,
1.01–5.67; P¼0.047).
7A multicenter study showed
worse adjusted mortality rate with early repair overall(adjusted OR, 7.78; 95% CI, 1.69 –35.70; adjusted
P¼0.008) although, in subgroup analysis, mortality
rate differences only trend ed toward favoring delayed
repair ( P>0.05).
8Recommendation-Speci ﬁcS u p p o r t i v eT e x t
1. Patients with BTTAI are at elevated risk of aortic-
related and overall mortality. Because of the acuity ofinjury and severity of concomitant polytrauma,expertise in aortic imaging and treatment at the treat-ing facility is paramount to improve outcomes.Further, most patients will bene ﬁtf r o mc a r ea tal e v e l1
trauma center with multid isciplinary expertise in
treating concomitant injuries, although the risk of
delayed treatment because of transport time must be
weighed against the bene ﬁts of immediate treatment.
2. Although no randomized trials exist, historical litera-
ture shows that aortic rupture occurs in w12% of pa-
tients with BTTAI who were awaiting repair withoutmedical management; small studies using protocols ofbeta blockers as ﬁrst-line therapy have reported rates
of 0% rupture while awaiting repair.
1,2In the acute
trauma setting, hypovolemia may result in permissive
hypotension, obviating the need for administeringanti-impulse medications (typically intravenous betablockers with or without supplemental intravenousvasodilators [eg, nicardipine, clevidipine, sodiumnitroprusside]) to decrease aortic wall stress.Conversely, permissive hypotension may not be toler-ated with other concomitant injuries, in which
adequate end-organ perfu sion requires higher BPs.
7.7.1.2. Approach to the Initial Management of BTTAI
Recommendations for Approach to the Initial Management of BTTAI
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 C-LD1. In patients with grade 1 BTTAI ( Figure 23 ), nonoperative management and follow-up imaging are
recommended.1,2
1 C-LD2. In patients with grade 3 to 4 BTTAI ( Figure 23 ) and nonprohibitive comorbidities or injuries, aortic
intervention is recommended.1,3
2a C-LD3. In patients with grade 2 BTTAI ( Figure 23 ) and with high-risk imaging features ( Table 32 ), aortic inter-
vention is reasonable.3,4
2b C-LD4. In patients with grade 2 BTTAI ( Figure 23 ) and without high-risk imaging features ( Table 32 ), nonoper-
ative management and follow-up surveillance imaging may be reasonable.3,4
Synopsis
The most common site of BTTAI is the aortic isthmus,
because of its site as transition from the un ﬁxed aortic
arch to the ﬁxed descending thoracic aorta and the rela-
tively lesser tensile strength of this region. Othersegments that may be involved include the proximal
ascending aorta (8% –27%), aortic arch (8% –18%), and
distal descending thoracic aorta (11% –21%). The most
widely used grading scale is that proposed by Estrera et al
and endorsed by the SVS clinical practice guidelineJACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee321

(Figure 23 ).1,2In Estrera ’so r i g i n a lp a p e r ,a l lp a t i e n t sw i t h
grade 1 injuries were managed medically and had a 0%mortality rate.
2Current SVS guidelines recommend
expectant management of grade 1 injuries and repair of allother grades.
1Trauma studies have found that 32% of
BTTAIs are managed nonoperatively,3with an associated
mortality rate of 25%.5Overall mortality rate was signi ﬁ-
cantly higher in nonoperatively managed patients (35.0%
versus 11.2%; P<0.001), while aortic-related mortality rate
was similar (9.8% versus 5.0%; P¼0.119).3
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text: Management
1. The decision for nonoperative versus operative man-
agement of BTTAI includes complex and dynamic fac-tors such as the patient ’s stability, concomitant
injuries, and potential imagi ng characteristics that may
predict aortic stability. Grade 1 BTTAIs are likely toresolve and are associated with extremely low aortic-related death. Medical management and follow-upimaging to ensure resolution is appropriate.
1,2
2. Grade 3 and 4 BTTAIs are at high risk of progression
and rupture and should be treated in an urgent
manner. In grade 3 injuries, nonoperative manage-ment was an independent predictor of all-cause death(OR, 29.65; 95% CI, 5.62 –15.649; P<0.0001), and im-
aging characteristics did not predict aortic-relateddeath.
4
3. Although injury grade was an independent predictor of
aortic-related death, outcomes of grade 1 and 2 injuries
were similar between nonoperative management and
TEVAR, including in-hospital and aortic-related death(P>0.05).
3A high-volume center reported no differ-
ences in mortality rates or aortic-related mortalityrates between nonoperati ve and operative manage-
ment of grade 1 and 2 injuries.
4
4. Findings of secondary signs of injury and multiple
secondary signs are more common in patients with
higher-grade of aortic inju ry and may prompt stronger
consideration for operative intervention.6The pres-
ence of aortic arch hematoma of >15 mm in thickness
was predictive of death.7FIGURE 23 Classi ﬁcation System for BTTAIs
Aortic injuries are classi ﬁed according to severity, based on the ﬁndings of diagnostic imaging. Grade 1, intimal tear. intimal ﬂap, or both. Grade 2, intramural hematoma.
Grade 3, aortic wall disruption with pseudoaneurysm. Grade 4, aortic wall disruption with free rupture. BTTAI indicates blunt traumatic thoracic aortic injury. Adapted
from Azizzadeh et al,2Copyright 2009, with permission from Elsevier, Inc. and the Society for Vascular Surgery.
TABLE 32 High-Risk Imaging Features of BTTAI
nPosterior mediastinal hematoma >10 mm8
nLesion to normal aortic diameter ratio >1.48
nMediastinal hematoma causing mass effect6
nPseudocoarctation of the aorta6
nLarge left hemothorax6
nAscending aortic, aortic arch, or great vessel involvement9
nAortic arch hematoma7
BTTAI indicates blunt traumatic thoracic aortic injury.Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e322

7.7.1.3. Endovascular Versus Open Surgical Repair
Synopsis
Endovascular therapy for BTTAI has become the pre-
dominant approach. From 2007 to 2015, rates of openrepair decreased from 7.5% to 1.9%, while rates of TEVAR
increased from 12.1% to 25.7%.
2
No randomized trials for open versus endovascular
management have been conducted.4Rather, trauma
registry data and meta-analyses have shown that, inpatients with suitable anatomy, TEVAR offers superior30-day mortality rates and lower rates of SCI and acutekidney injury. Concomitant injuries may promptconcern over procedural use of heparin, and the use of
periprocedural heparin should be balanced against the
overall bleeding risk for each patient. In a small studyof TEVAR in patients with predominantly grade 3BTTAI, there were no differences in bleeding, throm-boembolism, or mortality rates between use of fullheparin, low-dose heparin, and no heparin, althoughpatients who received full heparin underwent repair ata time interval 3 times longer than did those who
received no heparin.
5Recommendation-Speci ﬁcS u p p o r t i v eT e x t
1. Compared with open repair, endovascular treatment of
B T T A Ii sa s s o c i a t e dw i t hi m p r o v e dp r o c e d u r a la n d3 0 -day mortality rates, as well as postoperative complica-tions, including SCI and acute kidney injury.
1-3,6.I na
meta-analysis of 17 retrospective studies, TEVAR wasassociated with lower proce dural and 30-day mortality
rates (OR, 0.31 and 0.44, respectively) and post-
operative paraplegia (OR, 0.32).
1Murad et al showed
similar reductions in mortality (relative risk, 0.61) andSCI (relative risk, 0.34) in 139 studies encompassing7,768 patients.
3Studies using the National Trauma Data
Bank, a multicenter registry of trauma centers, alsohave identi ﬁed signi ﬁcantly improved mortality rates,
shorter ICU and shorter hospital stay, and lower rates ofacute kidney injury and acute respiratory distress
syndrome
2,6for TEVAR compared with open repair.
7.7.2. Initial Management of Blunt Traumatic Abdominal Aortic
Injury (BAAI)Recommendation for Endovascular Versus Open Surgical Repair
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In patients with BTTAI who meet indications fo rr e p a i ra n dw i t ha p p r o p r i a t ea n a t o m y ,T E V A Ri s
recommended over open repair.1-3
Recommendations for Initial Management of BAAI
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 C-LD1. In patients with grade 1 to 2 BAAI ( Table 33 ) without malperfusion, anti-impulse therapy, if clinically
tolerated, and repeat imaging within 24 to 48 hours of the initial scan is recommended to reduce risk ofinjury progression.
1
1 C-LD2. In patients with grade 4 BAAI ( Table 33 ), repair should be performed to address life-threatening aortic
injury.2-4
2a C-LD3. In patients with grade 2 BAAI ( Table 33 ) and associated malperfusion, it i s reasonable to consider repair.1
2a C-LD4. In patients with BAAI, treatment with either endo vascular or open repair is reasonable and depends on
degree of injury, aortic anatomy, and the patient ’so v e r a l lc l i n i c a ls t a t u s .1-4
2b C-LD5. In patients with grade 3 BAAI ( Table 33 ), it may be reasonable to consider repair to reduce risk of
progression to life- threatening injury.5
3: Harm B-NR6. In patients with BAAI, the usefulness of routine app lication of resuscitative e ndovascular balloon oc-
clusion of the aorta (REBOA) for hemorrhage contro l is unclear and, in some cases, may cause harm.6-8JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee323

Synopsis
BAAI represents a rare traumatic entity, occurring
in<1% of patients with blunt trauma. Patients with BAAI
often have concomitant inju ries such as rib fractures,
abdominal visceral injury, and cardiac complications that
will affect treatment decisions. Similar to BTTAI,
abdominal aortic injuries are graded based on aorticcontour defects, and this grading can be used to provide aframework for treatment and determination of risk ofmajor morbidity and death from injuries ( Table 33 ).
Because BAAI is rare and symptoms are wide ranging,patients should be managed on an individual basis. Ingeneral, patients with grade 1 aortic injuries can likely be
managed with antihypertensive therapy, beta blockade,
and antiplatelet therapy, if not contraindicated, withrepeat scan at 24 to 48 hours. Grade 2 injuries can simi-larly be managed nonoperatively but may progress toinclude end-organ vessel thrombosis or rupture. Grade 3injuries may bene ﬁt from endovascular treatments if
anatomically amenable. Grade 4 injuries are more likelyto present with refractory hypotension, warranting rapid
control of hemorrhage, which may be done in theemergency department (eg, antero-lateral thoracotomy
with aortic cross-clamping ) or operating room. Whether
open or endovascular means are used for BAAI repair willdepend on patient ’s clinical status, hospital resources,
and practitioner experience. Additionally, Shalhub et al
1
propose using aortic injury zone categorization when
considering options for rep air, which differ from trau-
matic abdominal zones of injury ( Figure 24 ). Speci ﬁcally,
in their multicenter experience, some zone 2 and 3 in-juries could be managed endovascularly while no zone 2injuries were managed this way. Lastly, data on the use ofREBOA for hemorrhage below the diaphragm, not per-formed in the operating theater, and without ﬂuoroscopic
guidance are mixed, with few data showing survival
bene ﬁt and some trauma registry data showing harm.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Because BAAI is very rare, in an effort to provide
clinical evidence for the management of BAAI, Shalhubet al
1aggregated data from 12 trauma centers. In the
authors ’experience in treating 113 patients with BAAI,
most of those with grade 1 and 2 injuries were
FIGURE 24 Abdominal Aortic Zones of Injury for Surgical Approac hes and Abdominal Zones of Injury Based on Trauma Classi ﬁcation
(A)The abdominal aortic zones of injury described by Shalhub et al.1(B)The abdominal zones of injury traditionally described in trauma. The abdominal aortic zones of
injury may help in prognostication and deciding whether an endovascular or open repair is feasible. Shalhub et al1found that the mortality rate was highest in zone 2
(see panel A) grade 4 aortic injuries ( Table 33 ). Moreover, no zone 2 aortic injuries identi ﬁed in a multicenter experience were managed by endovascular means. Panel A,
adapted from Shalhub et al.1Copyright 2014, with permission from Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e324

successfully managed nonoperatively with anti-
impulse therapy and repeat CTA imaging. Most ofthese injuries did not show progression and did not
require in-hospital intervention. However, some pa-
tients will develop angiographic progression of lesionsor develop symptoms from vessel occlusion, aneu-rysmal degeneration, or pseudoaneurysm formation.Such progression should prompt consideration oftreatment to prevent further progression to symp-tomatic or life-threatening disease.
2. Patients with grade 4 injuries are more likely to present
with hypotension and aort ic transection as well as
visceral vessel avulsion.
2-4In a single-center experi-
ence, all 8 patients with grade 4 injuries experiencedcardiac arrest in the emergency department or oper-ating room. Although all 8 pa tients survived to reach
the operating room and 7 survived the repair, all diedwithin days of injury. In multicenter experience, themortality rate for grade 4 injuries was 83%. Most
deaths from BAAI were within the ﬁrst 24 hours of
presentation and attributable to cardiac arrest fromhemorrhagic shock.
3. Patients may present with grade 2 injuries without
evidence of malperfusion and thus be managed non-operatively. However, for patients who present with orprogress to organ or limb malperfusion, endovascularor open repair may be needed to reduce morbidity and
mortality rates. In their mult icenter experience, Shal-
hub et al
1found that of the 38 patients who present
with grade 2 injuries, 45% were initially managednonoperatively, 34% were treated with open repair,a n d2 1 %w e r et r e a t e dw i t he n d o v a s c u l a rr e p a i r .O fthose initially managed conservatively, 3 eventually
progressed to having ischemic symptoms warrantingconsideration of repair, with 1 patient who refused
repair who died of sepsis from limb ischemia, anotherwho died intraoperatively, and a third who success-
fully underwent hybrid endovascular and open repair.
4. Both endovascular and open approaches have been
described for BAAI,
1-4and analyses of large trauma
databases reveal no signi ﬁcant differences in mortality
rates between the two. Ana tomical considerations,
patient clinical status and comorbid injuries, andpractitioner experience will in ﬂuence the choice of
approach. Shalhub et al
1found that aortic zone 2 and 3
injuries appeared to be more amenable to endovascular
approaches, while most grade 4 injuries were treatedwith open surgery.
1,2Currently, no FDA-approved de-
vices are available speci ﬁcally for treating trauma in
the abdominal aorta; conseq uently, clinical judgment
and experience are paramount in choosing an endo-vascular solution.
5. Pseudoaneurysm repair is often performed to prevent
progression to uncontrolled aortic rupture, although
data on characteristics associated with progression arescarce. In their multicenter study of BAAI, Shalhubet al
1found that only 30% of pseudoaneurysms were
managed nonoperatively, and failure of nonoperativemanagement occurred in 3 of these patients.
6. REBOA has reemerged over the past 10 years as a form
of rapid hemorrhage control in trauma. Many health
care centers have shown the feasibility of trauma sur-
geon or emergency physician placement of endovas-cular balloons for hemorrhage control.
6,9,10with a few
studies showing signi ﬁcant improvement in SBP after
placement11and survival bene ﬁt compared with those
who were not treated with REBOA12or those treated
with open methods of hemorrhage control.8However,
propensity-matched studies using large trauma data-
bases showed increased mortality rate and risk of
complications, such as acute kidney injury, amputa-tion, or both, with use of REBOA.
6-8There are clinical
scenarios in which REBOA is contraindicated. Accord-ing to the current US Army Joint Trauma System clin-ical practice guidelines, REBOA is contraindicated inthose with pericardial tamponade and major thoracichemorrhage. Relative contra indications to REBOA use
include cardiac arrest or shock caused by penetrating
chest trauma.TABLE 33 Descriptions of Blunt Aortic Injury Grades
Injury
Grade Descriptions
1 Minor intimal tear, intimal defect, or thrombus ( #10 mm)
2 Large intimal ﬂap, intimal defect, or thrombus ( $10 mm in
length or width)
3 Pseudoaneurysm4 Aortic rupture
In their descriptions of management of BAAIs, Shalhub et al1,2use an aortic injury
grading system described by Starnes et al13. Instead of using IMH to de ﬁne grade 2
injuries, as did Azizzadeh et al,14Starnes et al13deﬁne grade 2 injuries based on a higher
degree of intimal injury, defect, thrombus, or all of them to match radiographic ﬁndings
that they deemed to be less ambiguous.
BAAI indicates blunt traumatic abdominal aortic injury; and IMH, intramural
hematoma.JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee325

7.7.3. Long-Term Management and Surveillance After Blunt
Traumatic Aortic Injury (BTAI)
Synopsis
In-hospital and midterm outcomes after open and
endovascular repair for BTAI are good for patients whosurvive to hospital discharge.
2-4However, long-term data
are limited that report outcomes after open or endovas-
cular surgical repair for blunt aortic injury. The SVS
clinical practice guidelines for traumatic thoracic aorticinjury suggest that follow-up after TEVAR could bed e c r e a s e dt oe v e r y2t o5y e a r si nt h ea b s e n c eo fa b n o r -malities on follow-up imaging (ie, stent graft migration,endoleak) or could follow-up standard postoperative im-aging surveillance paradigms.
6No published guidelines
are available for postoperative surveillance after open or
endovascular abdominal aortic repair for blunt aortic
injury.
Long-term data about outcomes of blunt aortic injuries
managed nonoperatively are limited. A recent systemicreview of nonoperative management of blunt thoracicaortic injuries showed low aortic-related event rates butinjury progression in 7.6% of patients on surveillanceimaging (follow-up, 1 day to 118 months).
5In published
series of blunt aortic injury, patients with disease pro-
gression on repeat imaging all undergo repair.4,5Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. In-hospital data suggest that endograft malposition
(3%) and endoleak (2%) may occur in some patientsimmediately after endovascular repair,
1but midterm
data after open or endovascular repair of BTAIs suggesta low incidence of endoleak, stent migration, or rein-tervention after a mean of 52 to 60 months.
2-4Long-
term data for outcomes of open or endovascular
repair of BTAI are lacking.
2. Among patients with blunt traumatic injury who are
managed nonoperatively, in jury progression occurred
in 7.6% of patients, and injury healing or improvementwas observed in 34% of patients after a range of 1 day to118 months of follow-up.
5Injury progression, inter-
vention, or both occur in 0.68% of patients with grade 1to 2 BTAI.
5Long-term data for outcomes of blunt aortic
injuries managed nonoperatively are lacking.
7.8. Long-Term Management and Surveillance Imaging
After AAS
7.8.1. Long-Term Surveillance Imaging After Aortic Dissection
and IMHRecommendations for Long-Term Management and Surveillance After BTAI
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
2a C-LD1. In patients with BTAI who have undergone aortic repa ir, surveillance imaging at i ntervals appropriate for
the repair approach and location (see Section 7.8 ,“Long-Term Management and Surveillance Imaging
Following AAS ”) is reasonable.1-4
2b C-LD2. In patients with BTAI who have not undergone re pair, surveillance imaging with a CT at 1 month,
6 months, and 12 months after the diagnosis and, if stable, at appropriate intervals thereafter(depending on the type and extent of the injury), may be reasonable.
5
Recommendations for Long-Term Surveillance Imaging After Aortic Dissection and IMH
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In patients who have had an acute aortic dissection and IMH treated with either open or endovascular
aortic repair and have residual aortic disease, sur veillance imaging with a CT (or MRI) is recommended
after 1 month, 6 months, and 12 months and then, if stable, annually thereafter.1-6
1 B-NR2. In patients who have had an acut e aortic dissection and IMH that was managed with medical therapy
alone, surveillance imaging with a CT (or MRI) is recommended after 1 month, 6 months, and 12 months
and then, if stable, annually thereafter.7Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e326

Synopsis
Survival after an acute aortic dissection and IMH does
not guarantee freedom from subsequent aortic eventsbecause of residual aortic dissection and risk of aneurysmformation. Ten-year survival after repair of acute type A
aortic dissection is approximately 60% to 65%.
1,8Risk of
reoperation is increased for the aortic valve, the aorticr o o t ,a n dt h ed i s t a la o r t a ,
1,8,9with an aortic root reoper-
ation rate of approximately 15% at 15 years.9,10The
growth rate of the distal aorta is w1m m / y ,a n dt h er i s ko f
distal aortic reoperation ranges from 10% to 16% at 10years.
1,8,9Although the use of TEVA R provides protection
from early aortic-related death11in acute type B aortic
dissection, reintervention r ates after TEVAR for can range
from 27% to 39% at midterm follow-up.11,12Surveillance
imaging after thoracic aneurysm repair is critical tomonitor for progression of residual aortic disease and thepotential need for reintervention.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Although patients with uncomplicated type B aortic
dissection who are managed medically have a favorable
early prognosis, delayed aortic expansion occurs in20% to 50% of patients over 4 years,
7so regularsurveillance imaging is essential to detect midterm and
late aortic growth.7
2. After surgical replacement of the ascending thoracic
aorta in acute type A aortic dissection, patientsremain at risk for progressive enlargement of unre-
paired segments of residual dissected aorta, as well
as potential growth of nondissected native aorticsegments because of underlying medial degeneration.Consequently, repeat intervention on the aortic root,arch, or thoracoabdominal aorta may become neces-s a r y .F o ra c u t et y p eBa o r t i cd i s s e c t i o n ,
1,2TEVAR may
leave a patent false lumen, which can lead to aneu-rysm growth, and can be complicated by early
endoleaks in up to 35% of patients and late endoleaks
in 13% of patients.
5Careful follow-up is needed to
monitor for progression of disease in both dissectedand nondissected aorta. In addition to using cross-sectional imaging for most of the aorta, TTE can behelpful in monitoring aortic root anatomy and aorticvalve function over time.
7.8.2. Long-Term Management After Acute Aortic Dissection
and IMH
Recommendation for Long-Term Manageme nt After Acute Aortic Dissection and IMH
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
1 B-NR1. In patients with a previous acute aortic dissection and IMH, whether initially treated medically or with
intervention, who have chronic residual TAD an d an aneurysm with a total aortic diameter of ‡5.5 cm,
elective thoracic aortic repair is recommended.1-4
Synopsis
Despite the outcomes reported for surgical repair of
acute aortic dissection and IMH, a risk of ongoing growthis possible in the residually dissected as well as non-dissected thoracic aortic segments. When surveillance
imaging detects progression of residual aortic disease after
successful treatment of acute aortic dissection and IMH,there may be a potential need for aortic reintervention.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Reoperation after acute type A aortic dissection repair is
associated with low rates of complication. The primaryindications for reoperation are aneurysms of the thoracic
aorta, aortic anastomotic pseudoaneurysms, progressiveAR, or graft infection.
1Operative mortality rate of
elective repair is <10%.1-4After TEAVR, false-
lumen thrombosis can occur in 62% of extent 3B
dissection and 91% of extent 3A dissection cases. Rein-
tervention rates after TEVAR range from 15% to 26% at 5years and are dependent on the extent of aorticdissection.
4
7.8.3. Long-Term Management and Surveillance for PAUs
Recommendations for Long-Term Management and Surveillance for PAUs
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
2a C-LD1. In patients with a PAU who have undergone aortic repair, surveillance imaging at intervals appropriate for the
repair approach and location (see Section 6.5.6 ,“Surveillance After Aneurysm Repair ”) is reasonable.1-3
2a C-LD2. In patients with a PAU that is being managed medica lly, surveillance imagin g with a CT is reasonable at 1
month after the diagnosis and, if stable, every 6 months for 2 years, and then at appropriate intervals
thereafter (depending on patient age and PAU characteristics).1,4JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee327

Synopsis
For patients who undergo repair of a PAU, clinical
failure (de ﬁned as endoleak, disease progression, graft
occlusion, repeat aortic intervention, or procedure oraortic-related death) by 1 year after endovascular and
open repair occur in 8.6% and 8.7%, respectively.
1No
long-term data exist for outcomes after repair of PAU, butaortic-related complication rates after intervention arelikely similar to those for TAA.
For patients with PAUs who are managed non-
operatively, the risk of disease progression is signi ﬁ-
cant.
1,5,6Disease progression o ccurs more frequently in
patients presenting with symptomatic versus asymptom-
atic PAUs7but is >15% for both.7,8Among patients with a
PAU who have progression of disease on surveillanceimaging, 73% will show continued worsening on subse-quent imaging, and 46% will have progression to frankdissection after a mean of 12 months.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1 .A f t e ro p e no re n d o v a s c u l a rr e p a i ro faP A U ,t h e r ei sa
9% risk of clinical failure by 12 monthspostoperatively.
1Freedom from cumulative complica-
tions and interventions i s 86% at 12 months, 79% at 24
months, and 71% at 36 months postoperatively.2After
18 months of follow-up, new PAUs are observed inapproximately 5% of patients who have undergone
repair of a different PAU.
3
2. In a series of 109 patients with acute PAUs, 28% suf-
fered from an aortic-related adverse event by 30 daysof follow-up.
4Based on a systematic review of 184
patients with either thoracic or aortic PAU, 30% hadradiographic evidence of disease progression onmidterm follow-up.
1For patients with abdominal PAU,
23% have disease progression on CTA by 8 months of
follow-up, although the risk is higher in symptomatic
(43%) versus asymptomatic (17%) patients.7
8. PREGNANCY IN PATIENTS WITH AORTOPATHY
8.1. Counseling and Management of Aortic Disease in
Pregnancy and Postpartum
Recommendations for Counseling and Management o f Aortic Disease in Pregnancy and Postpartum
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
Prepregnancy
1 C-LD1. In patients with genetic aortopathies attributab le to syndromic (Marfan syndrome, Loeys-Dietz syn-
drome, vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome) and nsHTAD and who are contemplating pregnancy, geneticcounseling before pregnancy to discuss the heritable nature of their condition is recommended.
1-4
1 C-LD2. In patients with syndromic and nsHTAD, Turner syndr ome, BAV with aortic dilation, and other aortopathy
conditions, aortic imaging (with TTE, MRI or CT, o r both as appropriate) before pregnancy is recom-
mended to determine aortic diameters.1-3,5-13
1 C-LD3. In patients with syndromic and nsHTAD, Turner syndr ome, BAV with aortic dilation, and other aortopathy
conditions, who are contemplating pregnancy, counsel ing about the risks of aortic dissection related to
pregnancy is recommended.2-5,10,12,14
During Pregnancy
2a C-EO4. In patients with aortic aneurysms, or at increased ris k of aortic dissection, or both, it is recommended that
pregnancy be managed by a multidisciplinary team in cluding a maternal fetal m edicine specialist and
c a r d i o l o g i s t ,a n d ,i fl o g i s t i c a l l yf e a s i b l e ,t h a td e livery be planned in a hospital where the capability for
emergency aortic repair is available.
1 C-LD5. In patients with aortopathies who are pregnant, g uideline-directed treatment of hypertension is
recommended.6,15,17
1 C-EO6. In patients with syndromic and nsHTAD, beta-bl ocker therapy during preg nancy and postpartum is
recommended, unless contraindicated.Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e328

Synopsis
Pregnancy leads to hemodynamic and hormonal
changes and is a risk factor for aortic dissection in womenwith aortopathy.
21Aortic dissection may occur
throughout pregnancy or several weeks postpartum, with
most in the third trimester or up to 12 weeks ’post-
partum.21Women with aortopathy, including Marfan
syndrome,6,7,13,14,18,19,22Loeys-Dietz syndrome,2,22,23
vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome,3,24nsHTAD,25,26
Turner syndrome,12,27and BAV with aneurysm21,28are at
risk of pregnancy-related aortic dissection. Type A aorticdissection in pregnancy associates with aortic dilation,but type B aortic dissection may occur without aortic
dilation.
6,13,22
Before pregnancy, women with or at risk for aortopathy
undergo TTE (and MRI or CT, as appropriate) and arecounseled about risks of aortic dissection informed byspeci ﬁc circumstances. Aortic surveillance imaging
throughout pregnancy and several weeks postpartum isperformed to monitor aortic size.
9
In women at low risk, vaginal delivery is performed
with efforts to lessen hemodynamic stress and shorten
the second stage of labor.9,14Women at increased risk of
aortic complications typically undergo cesareandelivery.
9,14
In women with aortopathy, prepregnancy genetic
counseling, aortic imaging, discussion about aorticdissection risk, and shared decision-making arenecessary.
9
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. HTAD encompasses conditions in which aortic disease
has an underlying genetic trigger or familial occur-rence.
29,30Marfan syndrome, Loeys-Dietz syndrome,
vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, and nsHTAD areautosomal dominant conditions with an inheritancerisk of 50%.
9,30BAV may also be familial. Prepregnancy
counseling by a genetic counselor, medical geneticist,
or both or aortopathy specialist is recommended todiscuss the heritability of these conditions and toidentify at risk relatives and to discuss pregnancyconcerns.
9,302. Women with aortopathic conditions are at risk for
aortic dilation and aortic dissection related to preg-nancy.
6,7,14,22Evaluation of the aortic root, ascending
aorta, or both by echocardiogram before pregnancy inwomen with aortopathy is important for prepreg-
nancy counseling and management during preg-
nancy.
1-3,5-7,9,11,13In conditions that associate with
aortic disease distal to the ascending aorta, prepreg-nancy MRI or CT is performed to evaluate for aorticdisease.
2,5,9,14
3 .T h er i s ko ft y p eAa o r t i cd i s s e c t i o ni np r e g n a n c yr e l a t e s
to the aortopathy condition and aortic diameter, buttype B aortic dissection may occur without signi ﬁcant
aortic dilation.
6,22Most dissections related to preg-
n a n c yo c c u ri nt h et h i r dt r i m e s t e ra n di nt h e ﬁrst 12
weeks ’postpartum.21Awareness of the signs and
symptoms of acute aortic dissection among stake-holders may improve diagnosis and outcomes. InMarfan syndrome, type A aort ic dissection risk is very
low when aortic diameters are <4.0 cm and are much
higher at diameters >4.5 cm. In series of women with
TGFBR1 orTGFBR2 pathogenic variants, aortic dissec-
tion was reported in 0% to 19% of pregnancies.
21Rapid
aortic growth in pregnancy is reported in Loeys-Dietzsyndrome.
2Limited data are available on pregnancy
and SMAD3, TGFB2, orTGFB3 pathogenic variants.31,32
Maternal mortality rates in vascular Ehlers-Danlos
syndrome have ranged from 4% to 25%.3Among 283
women with vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome with 616
delivered pregnancies, 30 women died, with a
pregnancy-related death rate of 4.9%.3Pregnancy has
typically been avoided in wom en with vascular Ehlers-
Danlos syndrome.9The decision to proceed with
pregnancy in vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome iscomplex and, for some women with speci ﬁc genetic
v a r i a n t s ,n u l lm u t a t i o n s ,a nd normal vascular imaging,
the risk may be lower, and shared decision-making is
required.
3Aortic dissection at small aortic diameters
has been reported in some patients withnsHTAD.
25,26,33Aortic dissection related to BAV is rare
and, when reported, assoc iates with aneurysmal
dilation.14,21,281 C-LD7. In pregnant patients with an aortopathic condition or a dilated aortic root or ascending aorta, surveillance
TTE to monitor aortic diameters and aortic valve fu nction is recommended each trimester and again
several weeks postpartum, although imaging may be mo re frequent depending on aortic diameter, aortic
growth rate, and underlying condition.7-9,17,18
1 C-LD8. In pregnant patients with aortic disease who require s urveillance imaging of the aortic arch, descending,
abdominal aorta, or all 3, MRI without gadolinium is recommended over CT to avoid radiation exposure tothe fetus.
19,20(Continued)JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee329

4. For women with aortopathic conditions, multidisci-
plinary evaluation before and throughout pregnancycan evaluate and manage BP, aortic diameter, andmonitor pregnancy for complications. Delivery in asetting in which cardiothoracic surgery is available for
urgent management of aortic dissection allows rapid
treatment for this complication.
25Educating women
with aortopathic conditions and their physicians aboutthe signs and symptoms of acute aortic dissection mayallow earlier diagnosis and improve outcomes.
12,21,25
5. Hypertension is a risk factor for aortic dissection in
pregnancy.6For appropriate patients with or without
hypertension, beta blockers are used throughout
pregnancy and postpartum, recognizing that fetal
growth may be impaired.13,15Labetalol is suggested as
the beta blocker of choice for use in pregnant womenwith hypertension.
35Other agents may be required as
suggested by international guidelines.16,34ARBs and
ACEIs are contraindicated during pregnancy because ofteratogenicity. Calcium channel blockers are generallyavoided, when possible, in Marfan syndrome based on
limited information and concerns raised from mouse
models.
34,35
6. Beta-blocker therapy has been shown to lessen aortic
g r o w t hr a t e si nM a r f a ns y n d r o m ea n di sr e c o m m e n d e dto lessen hemodynamic aortic stress in Marfan syn-drome and related conditions.
4,5,13In the absence of
controlled trials, beta blockers are used in other aor-topathic conditions, and continuation of such therapy
during pregnancy is recommended unless contra-
indicated.
2,5,9Shard decision-making is required, un-
derstanding that fetal growth and weight may beimpaired when beta blockers are used in pregnancy.
15
However, in ROPAC (Registry Of Pregnancy AndCardiac disease), there was no signi ﬁcant difference in
birth weight in women treated with a beta blockerc o m p a r e dw i t hu n t r e a t e dw o m e n( 2 , 9 6 0g[ 2 , 3 5 8 –3,390
g] versus 3,270 g [2,750 –3,570 g]); P¼0.25).
14Because
aortic dissection may occur postpartum, beta-blocker
therapy is continued for at least several weeks after
delivery and inde ﬁnitely for those with indications for
long-term use.
7. Pregnancy-associated in creases in maternal blood
volume, heart rate, stroke v olume and cardiac output,
and neurohormonal activation begin in the ﬁrst
trimester and peak in the third trimester and peri-partum period.
9In women with aortopathic condi-
tions, the aorta may dilate during pregnancy,7and
signi ﬁcant dilation is a risk factor for ROPAC.8,14Aortic
imaging frequency during pregnancy is variable and isperformed every trimester but may be performed morefrequently depending on individual factors, includingthe speci ﬁc aortopathic condition, aortic diameter, and
rate of aortic growth.
3,5,9,10,12-14 ,25Evaluation of the
aorta several weeks postpartum to determine aortic
diameter is performed to evaluate for aortic dilation.9
8. In patients with aortopathy that involves the aortic
arch, descending or abdominal aorta or branches, or allof them, cross-sectional imaging identi ﬁes aortic
anatomy and diameters. MRI without gadoliniumcontrast is low-risk during pregnancy and is preferred
over CT for elective imaging to avoid the risks ofionizing radiation exposure to the developing
fetus.
9,19,20A TEE can be performed during pregnancy,
if required, to evaluate the descending aorta.
8.2. Delivery in Pregnant Patients With Aortopathy
Recommendations for Delivery in Pregnant Patients With Aortopathy
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 C-EO1. In pregnant patients with a history of chronic aor tic dissection, cesarean delivery is recommended.
1 C-EO2. In pregnant patients with an aortopathy and an aortic diameter of <4.0 cm, vaginal delivery (when
otherwise appropriate) is recommended.
2a C-EO3. In pregnant patients with a diameter of the aortic root, ascending aorta, or both, of ‡4.5 cm, cesarean
delivery is reasonable.
2b C-EO4. In pregnant patients with a diameter of the aortic root, ascending aorta, or both, of 4.0 cm to 4.5 cm,
vaginal delivery with regional anesthesia, expedited second stage, and assisted delivery may be
reasonable.
2b C-EO5. In pregnant patients with syndromic and nsHTAD, and a diameter of the aortic root, ascending aorta, or
both, of 4.0 cm to 4.5 cm, cesarean delivery may be considered.Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e330

Synopsis
The risk of type A aortic dissection related to pregnancy
in Marfan syndrome is related to aortic root diameter, withal o wr i s k( w1%) of aortic dissection at an aortic
diameter <4.0 cm and much greater risk at aortic diameters
>4.5 cm.
1-3Progressive aortic dilation and hypertension
also determine dissection risk.4-6Complex and shared
decision-making is required when the aorta is between 4.0cm and 4.5 cm in diameter, rec ognizing that although some
series report low risk,
2,7,8aortic dissection related to
pregnancy at this diameter may occur.1Modi ﬁed World
Health Organization classi ﬁcation on cardiovascular risk
places women with Marfan syndrome and moderate aortic
dilation of 4.0 cm to 4.5 cm in modi ﬁed World Health Or-
ganization class III and those with aortic diameter >4.5 cm
in class IV.9Because of increased risk of aortic dissection,
pregnancy is avoided when th e aortic root diameter is >4.5
cm.1-3,9Type B aortic dissection is responsible for 20% to
40% of pregnancy-related dissections in Marfan syn-drome, often occurring without aortic dilation
1,6,8,10and
may occur after previous aortic root replacement in Marfan
syndrome and Loeys-Dietz syndrome.11,12Aortic dissection
frequently occurs postpartum, with heightened risk up to12 weeks after delivery.
1Patients at risk and their care
teams should remain alert to signs and symptoms sug-gesting acute dissection.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Very limited information exists about pregnancy-
related aortic risks in patients with chronic aortic
dissection. Because of concerns for aneurysmalenlargement, recurrent diss ection and aortic rupture,
pregnancy is considered to be high risk in women withchronic aortic dissection. To allow optimal timing ofdelivery, elective cesarean delivery is usually per-formed in women with chronic aortic dissection.2. Type A and type B aortic dissection related to preg-
nancy may occur in Marfan syndrome.
1,2,6Women
with aortic root dilation >4.0 cm and, especially >4.5
cm, are at increased risk of type A aortic dissectionduring pregnancy and postpartum.
1,3Aortic dissec-
tion has been reported to be low risk in small series
of women with aortic diameters between 4.0 cm and4.5 cm,
2,7,8but aortic dissection related to pregnancy
at this diameter may occur.1Type B aortic dissection
related to pregnancy may occur without signi ﬁcant
aortic dilation and after previous aortic rootreplacement.
1,11
3. In the absence of controlled trials, cesarean delivery is
often performed in women with Marfan syndrome and
as i g n i ﬁcantly dilated aorta to allow for a planned
delivery.2,9
4. There are no randomized trials of delivery methods in
women with aortopathy. When the aorta is not signif-icantly dilated, vaginal delivery using methods tolessen hemodynamic stress, including regional anes-thesia and an expedited se cond stage and assisted
delivery, is often performed.
2,8,9Coexistent lumbosa-
cral dural ectasia, spine disease, or both in women withaortopathic conditions may complicate epiduralanesthesia.
13,14
5. Cesarean delivery is often performed in women with
Marfan syndrome and aortic dilation of >4.0 cm.2,8
Among 27 women with Marfan syndrome and aortic
dilation, 21 of 27 women had a vaginal delivery. The
cesarean delivery rate was 23.8% and 16.7% in women
with diameter <4.0 cm and 4.0 cm to 4.5 cm,
respectively.8
8.3. Surgery Before Pregnancy in Women With Aortic Disease
Recommendations for Surgery Before Pregnancy in Women With Aortic Disease
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 C-LD1. In patients with Marfan syndrome and an aortic root diameter of >4.5 cm, aortic surgery before pregnancy
is recommended.1-4
2b C-LDIf the aortic root diameter is 4.0 cm to 4.5 cm, aortic surgery before pregnancy may be considered,
especially if there are risk factors for ao rtic dissection (ie, rapid aortic growth of ‡0.3 cm/y or a family
history of aortic dissection).1,2,5-8
2a C-EO2. In patients with Loeys-Dietz syndrome attributable to pathogenic variants in TGFB2 orTGFB3 and an
aortic diameter of ‡4.5 cm, surgery before pregnancy is reasonable.
2b C-EOIf the Loeys-Dietz syndrome is attr ibutable to pathogenic variants in TGFBR1 ,TGFBR2 ,o rSMAD3 ,a n dt h e
aortic diameter is ‡4.0 cm, surgery before pregnancy may be considered.JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee331

Synopsis
The decision to proceed with operative intervention for
an aortic root, ascending aortic aneurysm, or both in awoman contemplating pregnancy is complex and dependson many factors. Considerations that inform this decision
include the speci ﬁc disorder, genetic variant, rate of
aortic growth, family history, and phenotype and includeshared decision-making ( Table 34 ). Specialists involved in
this decision may include aortopathic specialists, cardi-ologists, medical geneticists, maternal fetal medicinespecialists, and aortic surgeons at experienced centers.The risks of aortic surgery should be considered andalthough prophylactic aneurysm surgery will prevent
proximal aortic dissection, a risk remains of pregnancy-
related dissection distal to the aortic graft in HTAD, andthis risk may be higher in women with Loeys-Dietz syn-drome attributable to pathogenic variants in TGFBR1 and
TGFBR2 .
12,13
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Women with Marfan syndrome and aortic root dila-
tion>40 mm and especially >4.5 cm are at increased
risk of type A aortic dissection during pregnancy andpostpartum.
1,2,6,7,12Pregnancy in small series of
women with Marfan syndrome and aortic diametersbetween 4.0 cm and 4.5 cm was reported to berelatively safe in carefully monitored women,
1-4
although acute type A aortic dissection may occur.5
The presence of additional risk factors for aortic
dissection, including family history of aortic dissec-
tion and rapid aortic growth ( $0.3 cm/y), and patient
preference may inform the shared decision for aorticsurgery before pregnancy when the aortic diameteris<4.5 cm.
8,14,15
2. Information is lacking about aortic diameters
and aortic dissection risk related to pregnancy inLoeys-Dietz syndrome, because most women who were
pregnant were unaware of their diagnosis beforepregnancy. The size threshold for elective surgery toreplace the dilated aortic root and ascending aorta inLoeys-Dietz syndrome depends on multiple factors and
is informed by the speci ﬁc pathogenic variant and the
family history, rate of aortic growth, extra-aorticphenotypic features, and involves shared decision-making. Patients with TGFB2 -a n d TGFB3 -related
Loeys-Dietz syndrome may have a lower aorticdissection risk than those with variants in TGFBR1 ,
TGFBR2 ,o r SMAD3.
16,17Women with aortic root di-
ameters of >4.0 cm are likely at increased risk for
pregnancy-related aortic dissection based on data from
w o m e nw i t hM a r f a ns y n d r o m ea n dt h em o r es e v e r eaortopathy in Loeys-Dietz syndrome attributable toTGFBR1 ,TGFBR2 ,a n d SMAD3 variants.
5,18-20There
were no pregnancy-related aortic dissection reportedin a series of women with SMAD3 variants, but only 2
women had aortic diameters known before pregnancy(and both were normal).
20
3. Because phenotypic featu res are absent in patients
with nsHTAD because of pathogenic variants in mul-tiple genes (eg, ACTA2 ,MYH11 ,MYLK ,PRKG1 ,a n d
others), the ﬁrst manifestation of disease may be acute
aortic dissection, including that related to pregnancy.
21
I nas e r i e so fp a t i e n t sw i t h ACTA2 pathogenic variants,
20% of aortic dissection were related to pregnancy.21
Aortic dissection at small aortic diameters has been
reported related to pregnancy in patients with ACTA2 -
and MYLK -related HTAD.21,22Ruptured type B dissec-
tion has been reported.23Individualized assessment of
pregnancy risks based on the speci ﬁc genetic condition
and other individual factors may inform pregnancymanagement, recognizing that limited information isavailable to guide decision-making.
21,22,241 C-EO3. In patients with nsHTAD and an aortic diameter of ‡4.5 cm, surgery before pregnancy is recommended.
2b C-EOIf the aortic diameter is 4.0 cm to 4.4 cm, surgery bef ore pregnancy may be considered, depending on the
molecular diagnosis, family history, and aortic growth rate.
1 C-LD4. In patients with Turner syndrome and ASI of ‡2.5 cm/m2, surgery before pregnancy is recommended.9-11
1 C-EO5. In patients with a BAV (in the absence of Turne rs y n d r o m eo ra nH T A D )a n da na o r t i cd i a m e t e ro f ‡5.0 cm,
surgery before pregnancy is recommended.
1 C-EO6. In patients with sporadic aortic root aneurysms, ascending aortic aneurysms, or both and a diameter
of‡5.0 cm, surgery before pregnancy is recommended.(Continued)Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e332

4. Among those with Turner syndrome, an ASI >2.0 cm/
m2is considered dilated, and the risk of aortic dissec-
tion in Turner syndrome is greatest when the ASIis$2.5 cm/m
2.9,10When aortic dissection occurs in
Turner syndrome, almost 90% of cases have an iden-tiﬁable risk factor, such as underlying aortic dilation,
aortic coarctation, BAV, or hypertension.
11
5. Despite the relative frequency of BAV in the popula-
tion, aortic dissection relat ed to pregnancy in patients
with a BAV (and without Turner syndrome or HTAD) israrely reported.
5,25I n8 8w o m e nw i t hB A Va n dw i t h o u t
aortic dilation, there were no cases of aortic dissectionin 186 deliveries.26In a series of 49 patients with BAV
with moderate aortic dilation (median aortic diameter42 mm) reporting pregnancy outcomes, there were nocases of aortic dissection.
3When type A aortic dissec-
tion did complicate pregnancy in isolated BAV, signif-
icant aortic dilation was noted.5,25There is no
evidence-based information regarding pregnancy out-comes in women with BAV and aortic diameters >4.5
cm to inform aortic risk. In these cases, pregnancymanagement and shared decisions about aortic surgerymay be informed by other risk factors for dissection,including rapid aortic growth, body size, and familyhistory. Aortic dissection risk increases in patients with
BAV when the aortic diameter exceeds 5 cm.
27Because
of risk of aortic dissection, pregnancy in patientswith a BAV and an aortic diameter of >5.0 cm is clas-
siﬁed to be modi ﬁed World Health Organization class
IV, carrying high risk of maternal morbidity andmortality.
28
6. Aortic root and or ascending aortic dilation >4.0 cm in
a woman of child-bearing age is uncommon, and its
presence should trigger an evaluation for underlying
genetic aortopathy.29Even when there is clear evi-
dence of an autosomal dominant transmission of TAAin a family, currently available molecular genetictechnology only identi ﬁes a pathogenic variant in a
known gene leading to TAA in about 20% to 25% offamilies.
29In sporadic TAA disease, genetic variants
are found in even fewer cases. In young patients at low
surgical risk with aortic ro ot or ascending aortic an-
eurysms of 5.0 cm, surgical intervention is performed.Surgery before pregnancy at smaller aortic diameters issometimes performed and is informed by aortic growthrate, hypertension, surgical expertise, patient wishes,and other factors involving a shared decision depend-ing on individual circumstances.
8.4. Pregnancy in Patients With Aortopathy: Aortic Dissection
and Aortic Surgery in PregnancyTABLE 34Prophylactic Aortic Surgery Before Pregnancy
in Women With Aortopathic Conditions
ConditionSurgical Threshold Before
Pregnancy *by Aortic Diameter
(cm) or Aortic Size Index (cm/m2)
Marfan syndrome >4.5 cm
Marfan syndrome with risk factors
(rapid aortic growth of $0.3 cm/y;
family history of aortic dissection)4.0–4.5 cm
Loeys-Dietz syndrome (attributable to
pathogenic variants in TGFBR1 ,
TGFBR2 ,o rSMAD3 )$4.0 cm
Loeys-Dietz syndrome (attributable
to pathogenic variants in TGFB2
orTGFB3 )$4.5 cm
Nonsyndromic heritable thoracic
aortic disease$4.5 cm †
Turner syndrome $2.5 cm/m2
Bicuspid aortic valve $5.0 cm ‡
*Shared decision-making is required to determine the surgical threshold before elective
aortic root, ascending aortic surgery, or both and is informed by the condition, speci ﬁc
pathogenic variant, age, body size, aortic growth rate, phenotype, and family history of
aortic dissection, and surgery at smaller aortic diameters may be considered depending
on individual circumstances.†Aortic dissection related to pregnancy has occurred at small aortic diameters in women
with ACTA2 and MYLK pathogenic variants. Prophylactic aortic surgery before preg-
nancy at smaller aortic diameters may be reasonable in these conditions and other
nonsyndromic heritable thoracic aortic disease and may be informed by the molecular
diagnosis, family history, and aortic growth rate.
‡Prophylactic aortic surgery may be considered at smaller aortic diameters depending
on body size, aortic growth rate, and family history.
Colors correspond to Class of Recommendations in Table 2 .
Recommendations for Pregnancy in Patients With Aortopathy: Aortic Dissection and Aortic Surgery in Pregnancy
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 C-LD1. In patients experiencing an acute type A aortic dissection during the ﬁrst or second trimester of preg-
nancy, urgent aortic surgery with fetal monitoring is recommended.1-3
1 C-LD2. In patients experiencing an acute type A aortic dissec tion during the third trimes t e ro fp r e g n a n c y ,u r g e n t
cesarean delivery immediately followed by aortic surgery is recommended.1-4JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee333

Synopsis
During pregnancy, if marked aortic dilation is present
or rapid aortic expansion occurs, risks of maternal aorticdissection or rupture must b e considered. If early in
pregnancy, high maternal risk of morbidity or death
may warrant pregnancy termination.
1,4Prophylactic
aortic surgery during pregnancy requires complexdecision-making and should be individualized based on
maternal and fetal risks.
1,2,4Cardiac surgery in the ﬁrst
trimester has risks of fetal developmental defects, whilesurgery in the third trimester carries risks to fetal cir-culation and maternal hemodynamics.
1Semi-elective
surgery during pregnancy may have its lowest collec-
tive risk to fetal organogenesis and maternal hemody-
namics during the second trimester.1,3,4If type A aortic
dissection occurs during pregnancy, urgent obstetricand cardiac surgical consultation is necessary, becausemanagement strategies depend on the viability of thefetus and condition of the mother. If type A aorticdissection occurs in the ﬁrst 26 weeks, emergency car-
diac surgery is performed, r ecognizing risk of fetal
loss.
1,2,4When duration of pregnancy associates with
higher likelihood of independent fetal survival (espe-cially after 28 weeks), cesarean delivery followed byaortic repair provides the best chances for fetal andmaternal survival.
1,2,4
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. If type A aortic dissection occurs during the ﬁrst 2 tri-
mesters, emergency aortic surgery is performed ﬁrstwith fetal monitoring and modi ﬁcations to anesthesia
and cardiopulmonary bypass, recognizing the high riskof fetal loss.
1-4If acute type A aortic dissection occurs
between 24 and 28 weeks, the care team must balancematernal and fetal risks when deciding between ce-
sarean delivery followed by aortic surgery or aortic
surgery with fetal surveillance.
1,4
2. If type A aortic dissection occurs in the third trimester,
given the increased likelihood of independent fetalsurvival, emergency cesa rean delivery followed by
maternal aortic surgery is recommended.
1,2,4In a series
of 20 patients with type A aortic dissection duringpregnancy, 19 underwent surgical repair and, of those
at>28 weeks gestation, delivery ﬁrst followed by aortic
surgery achieved good fetal outcomes.
2
3. Although uncomplicated type B aortic dissection in
pregnancy is treated medically, 20% will go on todevelop complications that require intervention
5;i n
such cases, endovascular repair is preferred over opensurgery, whenever feasible.
5
4. Prophylactic aortic surger y during pregnancy requires
complex decision-making, and management is indi-
vidualized based on maternal and fetal risks andbene ﬁts.
1,2,4
9. OTHER AORTIC CONDITIONS
9.1. In ﬂammatory Aortitis: Diagnosis and Treatment of
Takayasu Arteritis and Giant Cell Arteritis (GCA)1 C-EO3. In patients experiencing an acute type B aortic dissection during pregnancy, medical therapy is
recommended, unless endovascular or surgical the rapy is required to manage acute complications.5
2b C-EO4. In patients with progressive aortic dilation dur ing pregnancy, prophylactic aortic surgery may be
considered, depending on in dividual circumstances.1,2,4(Continued)
Recommendations for In ﬂammatory Aortitis: Diagnosis and Treatment of Takayasu Arteritis and GCA
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
Diagnosis
1 C-LD1. In patients with large vessel vasculitis (LVV), pro mpt evaluation of the entire aorta and branch vessels
with MRI or CT, with or without 18F-FDG positron em ission tomography (FDG-PET), is recommended.1-6Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e334

Synopsis
LVV comprises Takayasu arteritis and GCA, which are
the most common causes of aortitis.22,23Other known
causes of aortitis include immunoglobulin G4 –related
disease, antineutrophil cyto plasmic antibody-related
vasculitis, sarcoidosis, Behçet ’s disease, relapsing poly-
chondritis, and granulomatosis with polyangiitis; manycases of aortitis remain idiopathic. Whereas Takayasuarteritis and GCA tend to affect the thoracic aorta,immunoglobulin G4 –related disease most commonly af-
fects the abdominal aorta. Diagnostic criteria are sum-marized in Table 35 . Prompt diagnosis and initiation of
treatment is of utmost importance, because potential
complications include aortic aneurysms, aortic dissection,
IMH, PAU, and rupture, as well as progressive athero-sclerosis and thrombotic complications.
2418F-FDG-PET
with CT is useful for both the diagnosis of suspected LVVand to evaluate anti-in ﬂammatory treatment response,
especially before planned revascularization.
4,5Initial
treatment options for Takayasu arteritis and GCA includehigh-dose glucocorticoid t herapy (prednisone at 40 –60
m g / d ,o re q u i v a l e n t )o r ,f o rs e l e c tc a s e s ,i n t r a v e n o u sp u l s e
steroids along with adjuncti ve therapy, including (but
not limited to) tocilizumab and methotrexate ( Figures 25
and 26 ). Revascularization may be warranted in select
c a s e so fs t a b l ed i s e a s e ,a sw e l la si nA A S .
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. In suspected GCA or Takayasu arteritis, early imaging
can con ﬁrm the diagnosis when the resultscomplement clinical ﬁndings.
1Imaging the aorta
should be performed as soon as possible so that initi-ation of treatment is not delayed, given the risk ofcomplications from untreated LVV. Sensitivity ofdiagnostic imaging in the initial diagnosis of LVV de-
creases with duration of glucocorticoid treatment.
2
FDG-PET has a reported speci ﬁcity for GCA-related
aortitis as high as 100% and CTA about 85%.5In CT,
wall thickening from in ﬂammation may be mistaken
for atherosclerosis; however, given CT ’su s e f u l n e s si n
assessing occlusive lesions, intimal injury, ulcerativeplaques, and aneurysmal disease, it is often combinedwith FDG-PET in LVV.
1Evidence is limited for the role
o fM R Ii nG C A ,b u tM R Ii sw i d e l yu s e di nT a k a y a s u
arteritis given the patients ’younger age at diagnosis
and need for lifelong surveillance imaging.6If proximal
aortic involvement is con ﬁrmed by CT or MRI, then
echocardiography may be helpful to assess aortic valvefunction.
2. Active vasculitis is diagnosed by clinical symptoms of
GCA or Takayasu arteritis with evidence of in ﬂamma-
tion by serum biomarkers, imaging, or both. High-doseglucocorticoid ther apy (prednisone at 40 –60 mg/d or
equivalent) is standard ind uction therapy for GCA and
Takayasu arteritis and leads to remission and control ofactive disease in most patients
7-12(Figures 25 and 26 ).
Evidence supporting the ef ﬁcacy of induction therapy
with high-dose intraveno us methylprednisolone
in GCA comes only from small clinical trials, and thusTreatment
1 B-NR2. In patients with active GCA or Takayasu arteritis, ini tial medical therapy should include high-dose glu-
cocorticoids.7-12
1 B-R3. In patients with GCA who have evidence of active aortitis, tocilizumab is recommended as adjunctive
therapy to glucocorticoids, with methotrexate as an alternative.7,13,14
1 C-LD4. In all patients with Takayasu arter itis, nonbiological disease-modif ying anti-rheumatic drugs (DMARD)
should be given in combination with glucocorticoids.7,15,16
1 C-LD5. In patients with active GCA or T akayasu arteritis, treatment ef ﬁcacy should be periodically assessed by
monitoring in ﬂammatory serum markers (C-reactive prote in and erythrocyte sedimentation rate),
imaging with CT, MRI, or FDG-PET, and clinical symptoms.1,7,15,17-20
2a C-LD6. In patients with GCA or Takayasu arteritis who are in remission, elective endovascular or open surgical
intervention is reasonabl e to treat aortic and branc h vessel complications.7,21
2a C-EO7. In patients with GCA or Takayasu arteritis and aortic involvement who are in remission, annual
surveillance imaging with CT, MRI, or FDG-PET is reasonable.1,7,17-19(Continued)JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee335

the 2018 recommendations from the European Alli-
ance of Associations for Rheumatology (EULAR;formerly the European League Against Rheumatism)limits its use to patients with severe GCA at risk forblindness in the acute setting, and administration
should not delay oral glucocorticoid treatment.
7-9
Once the acute phase is controlled, glucocorticoid
taper should be initiated to reach a target prednisonedose of 15 to 20 mg/d within 2 to 3 months, and #5
mg/d for GCA and #10 mg/d for Takayasu arteritis
after 1 year.
7Older guidelines have supported the use
of antiplatelet or anticoagulants in LVV. Evidencefrom a meta-analysis does not support use of pro-
phylactic antithrombotic therapy in all patients with
GCA
25; instead, an individualized approach to antith-
rombotic therapy is recommended in the acute andchronic phases of GCA and Takayasu arteritis, basedon imaging and clinical ﬁndings of aortic and branch
vessel complications.
26
3. In an RCT of 251 patients with GCA, a 26-week pred-
n i s o n et a p e rc o m b i n e dw i t ht o c i l i z u m a b ,a n
interleukin-6 receptor inhibitor, was superior to either
a 26-week or 52-week prednisone taper plus placebo inreducing the primary outcome of glucocorticoid-freedisease remission at 1 year.
10Tocilizumab gained
approval for use in 2017 as adjunctive therapy for selectpatients with GCA, with methotrexate remaining analternative option.
7,13,14The EULAR 2018 updated
guidelines recommended limiting the use of adjunctive
therapy to those with refrac tory or relapsing disease,
those at risk of adverse effects of glucocorticoid treat-ment, or those at risk of cardiovascular complications(aortitis and major branch vessel involvement) fromGCA
7(Figure 25 ).
4. High-quality randomized c linical trial evidence sup-
porting the use of adjunctive therapy in Takayasuarteritis is limited. However, consensus expert opinionis to initiate DMARDs in combination with glucocorti-
coids in all patients with Takayasu arteritis, given highrelapse rates of up to 70%.
7Nonbiological DMARDs (eg,
methotrexate, hydroxychloro quine, azathioprine, sul-
famethoxazole, and le ﬂunomide) are considered ﬁrst
line according to the EULAR 2018 updated guidelines
on Takayasu arteritis treatment, with biologicalDMARDs (eg, tocilizumab or tumor necrosis factor-inhibitors) as second-line agents in select patientswho relapse on initial combination therapy
7,15,16
(Figure 26 ). Optimal treatment duration in Takayasu
arteritis is less well understood, because de ﬁning
remission in Takayasu arteritis is challenging. Out-
comes measures may include any of these: remission
based on clinical criteria, normalization of in ﬂamma-
tory biomarkers, stabilization on serial CT or MRI,improvement on PET-CT imaging, quality of life, andpresence of clinical disease relapse.
15A clear need re-
mains for both adequately powered randomized clin-
ical trials of Takayasu arteritis therapies and aconsensus de ﬁnition of treatment success.
5. The EULAR 2018 updated guidelines placed the great-
est emphasis on both the improvement of clinicalsymptoms and the stability of in ﬂammatory bio-
markers in de ﬁning the remission phase of LVV.
Consequently, data are limited regarding the role ofsurveillance imaging in those with no signs or symp-toms of active disease. Currently, tomographic imagingis complementary to clinical symptoms and laboratory
surveillance, and its use should be individualized,
focused mostly on the evaluation of new symptoms orsigns of aortic, major branch artery stenoses or aneu-rysms, or both.
1,7,15,17-19One prospective cohort study
using FDG-PET in disease surveillance of GCA showedreduced in ﬂammatory activity at 3 months after treat-
ment initiation but no further change at 6 months, withmost patients in clinical remission still showingTABLE 35 Diagnostic Criteria for In ﬂammatory Aortitis
Names Criteria Used in Diagnosis When Is Diagnosis Established?
Takayasu arteritis Age of onset <40 y $3 criteria are present (sensitivity 90.5%; speci ﬁcity 97.8%)
Intermittent claudication
Diminished brachial artery pulseSubclavian artery or aortic bruit
Systolic BP variation of >10 mm Hg between arms
Aortographic evidence of aorta or aortic branch stenosis
Giant cell arteritis Age>50 y $3 criteria are present (sensitivity >90%; speci ﬁcity>90%)
Recent-onset localized headache
Temporal artery tenderness or pulse attenuation
Elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate >50 mm/h
Arterial biopsy shows necrotizing vasculitis
Reprinted from Hiratzka et al. 2019.27Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e336

FIGURE 25 The 2018 European Alliance of Associations for Rheumatology (EULAR; fo rmerly European League Against Rheumatism) Recommended Algorithms
for the Pharmacological Treatment of Giant Cell Arteritis
GC indicates glucocorticoids; GCA, giant cell arteritis; and TNF, tumor necrosis factor. Modi ﬁed from Hellmich et al.7Copyright 2020, with permission from BMJ
Publishing Group Limited.JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee337

FIGURE 26 The 2018 European Alliance of Associations for Rheumatology (EULAR; fo rmerly European League Against Rheumatism) Recommended Algorithms
for the Pharmacological Treatment of Takayasu Arteritis
csDMARD indicates conventional synthetic disease modifying antirheumatic drug; GC, glucocorticoids; and TNF, tumor necrosis factor. Modi ﬁed from Hellmich et al.7
Copyright 2020, with permission from BMJ Publishing Group Limited.Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e338

positive PET ﬁndings.20What remains unknown are
the potential anatomic consequences of having a pos-itive FDG-PET scan despite clinical remission.
6. In patients with LVV who are in remission and have
aortic or branch artery complications that do not war-
rant urgent intervention, the role of elective endovas-
cular or open surgical repair approach should bedetermined by a multidisciplinary team including, butnot limited to, vascular surgery, vascular medicine,cardiology, and radiology specialists. The risk of suchelective intervention is lowest when patients are in theremission phase of the LVV
7; therefore, before inter-
vention, imaging with 18F-FDG-PET CT is often helpful
to assess treatment response and quantify the degree
of ongoing active in ﬂammation.1,4,5,18
7. The EULAR consensus de ﬁnitions for relapse and
remission have been incorporated into the 2018 upda-ted recommendations for management of LVV.
7A
major relapse of GCA and Takayasu arteritis includesrecurrence of clinical features of ischemia (ie, visualloss, jaw claudication, limb claudication, stroke) orevidence of active aortic in ﬂammation resulting in
branch vessel stenosis, aortic aneurysm, or dissection.Remission of LVV is characterized by lack of newclinical symptoms, a normalization of in ﬂammatory
biomarkers, and no evidence of progressive aortic and
branch artery dilation or narrowing by surveillance
imaging. However, signals of vessel in ﬂammation may
persist even in the absence of clinical disease.
1,6,19For
those in remission, annual surveillance imaging withCT or MRI is useful to detect disease progression in theaortic and branch arteries, even in the absence ofinﬂammation. More frequent surveillance imaging may
be necessary when evidence of active disease pro-
gression is apparent on annual imaging or if new
symptoms suggestive of arterial stenosis arise.
9.2. Infectious Aortitis
9.2.1. Diagnosis and Management of Infection of the
Native Aorta
Recommendations for Diagnosis and Mana gement of Infection of the Native Aorta
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 C-EO1. In patients with infectious aortitis and associate d aneurysms or dissection of the thoracic or abdominal
aorta, open surgical repair is recommended.
2b C-LDIn select patients, treatment with en dovascular repair may be considered.1-3
2a C-EO2. In patients with infectious aortitis complicated by rupture, either open or endovascular repair is
reasonable, based on the patient ’s status at presentation and institutional expertise.
2b C-EO3. In patients with infectious aortitis, intravenous antimicrobial therapy of at least 6 weeks ’duration may be
considered, with lifelong suppressive therapy in select cases not amenable to interventional repair or who
have recurrent infection.
Synopsis
The term “infectious aortitis ”describes an infection of
the aorta and has supplanted the older term “mycotic
aneurysm, ”which was used broadly but actually implies a
fungal cause. Aortic infections arise from either contig-
uous spread from adjacent structures or septic emboli and
hematogenous spread of microorganisms to the aortic wallvia a vulnerable plaque or preexisting aneurysm.
4Staph-
ylococcus aureus, Pneumococcus, Escherichia coli ,a n d Sal-
monella are the pathogens identi ﬁed in most reports.1-6
Syphilitic aortitis, which typically appears 10 to 25 years
after systemic Treponema pallidum infection, is now rare.
Fungal aortitis (from Candida orAspergillus )a n dt u b e r -
culous aortitis are uncommon and typically arise in
immunocompromised hosts.Medical therapy is challenging because the causative
organism is not always identi ﬁed, but a prolonged
course of antibiotics is often warranted.4The mortality
rate of infectious aortitis is high, because complications
include sepsis, aneurysm formation (saccular or pseu-
doaneurysm), erosion and subsequent ﬁstula, dissection,
or rupture. CT and MRI can size the aneurysm, detectcomplications, and aid in interventional planning. TEEis especially useful for imaging involvement of theaortic root and associated complications.
5Open surgical
repair is the standard treatment for infectious aortitis;however, in select patients with rupture, ﬁstula, hemo-
dynamic instability, or both, a hybrid or bridging
approach with endovascular therapy ( Table 36 )m a yb e
used.
2-8JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee339

Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. A diagnosis of infectious aortitis or mycotic aneurysm
and its complications warrants prolonged antimicrobialtherapy regardless of intervention, with 2016 scienti ﬁc
statement from the AHA suggesting a duration of 6weeks to 6 months, with consideration of lifelongsuppressive therapy in some cases.
5Given the high risk
of rupture or contained rupture in infectious aortitis,
open surgical repair is often warranted, although the
data supporting open surgical repair are limited, withmost evidence derived from single-institution caseseries and small cohort studies.
6-8Open surgical repair
includes in situ reconstruction or aortic resection withextra-anatomic bypass (ie, axillobifemoral bypass orfemorofemoral crossover b ypass graft placement)
3;
surgical debridement of all infected tissue is essential
to minimize the risk of persistent infection. The use of
endovascular repair has been increasing in select pa-tients with infectious aortitis.
6-8Limited data are
available for comparison of open surgical versusendovascular repair; some small studies showedsimilar long-term surviv al between the 2 methods in
treatment of infectious abdominal aortitis,
1-4although
the evidence may have selection bias. In a nationwide
Swedish retrospective popu lation-based cohort study
of 132 patients, of whom 50 (38%) presented withrupture, using propensity score analyses, 5-year sur-vival was similar with open repair versus EVAR, at 60%versus 58%, respectively.
3Moreover, the use of EVAR
was associated with improve d short-term survival andwas not associated with an increase in infection-related
complications or a need for late reoperation.3Use of
endovascular repair in the management of infectiousthoracic aneurysms, abdominal aneurysms, or bothwarrants ongoing study, and at present may be most
appropriate as a bridge procedure in cases of instability
or impending rupture, or in patients who may not be ﬁt
for open surgical intervention
5(Table 36 ).
2. The prognosis is often poor for infectious aortitis,
especially if rupture has occurred.6From a large single-
institution study over 18 years of 2,520 patients who
underwent surgery for infectious aortic aneurysms,
24% of aneurysms had already ruptured at presenta-tion, and 61% had penetrated into periaortic tissues.
6
Open surgical treatment opt ions include resection of
infected aorta with extra-a natomic reconstruction
(for abdominal aneurysm), or in situ reconstruction(for thoracic aneurysms and some aortoentericﬁstulae).
2-5,7,8The choice of intervention is based on
multiple factors ( Table 36 ), including the location and
extension of the aneurysm(s), the presence of ﬁstulae,
and the patient ’s clinical status. In select patients with
aneurysm rupture and hemodynamic instability and/oruncontrolled bleeding, endovascular repair may beused.
6
3. Because peripheral blood cultures and surgical spec-
imen cultures may be negative in a large proportion ofpatients with infectious aortitis,
5the choice of anti-
microbial agents may be empiric, and infectious dis-ease experts are usually involved in directing therapy.TABLE 36Management of Aortic Mycotic Aneurysm: Comparison of R esection and Extra-Anatomic Reconstruction, In Situ
Reconstruction, or Endovascular Device Repair
Procedure Potential Indications * Advantages Disadvantages
Extra-anatomic
reconstructionInfrarenal location with gross purulence,
psoas or retroperitoneal abscess,
vertebral osteomyelitis, inadequate
response to antibiotic therapy,selected aortoenteric ﬁstulaeAvoids placement of foreign body in
infected areaNot technically feasible for thoracic, suprarenal, or
visceral location or for emergency use
Long operating time
Long-term patency rates low
Stump blowout
Limb ischemia, amputation
Reinfection rate higher than for in situ reconstruction
Ischemic colitis
In situ reconstruction Thoracic, suprarenal, infrarenal,
or visceral location
Selected aortoenteric ﬁstulaeMore versatile than extra-anatomic: fewer
long-term complications, higher patency
rates, lower recurrent infection rate,
shorter operating time
Polyester grafts †available for emergency
surgeryTheoretical risk of infection because of interposition
of foreign material in infected site
Endovascular device
repairBridge procedure ‡: hemodynamic
instability, uncontrolled bleeding,
rupture or impending rupture,selected patients with aortocentric
ﬁstulae, patients who are not ﬁt
for open surgeryEmergency stabilization
Low early morbidity, mortality Less
invasive
No cross-clamping of aorta: spinal
cord injury, reperfusion injuryPersistent infections and device infections
Higher long-term morbidity, mortality with
device retention
Requires device explanation, reconstruction
*Potential indication; must be individualized for each patient.
†Polyester grafts, rifampin-soaked or silver-coated; less experience reported with cryopreserved arterial allografts or venous autografts.
‡Bridge procedure, used to stabilize patients until device explanation and arterial reconstruction.
Adapted from Wilson et al5with permission of the American Heart Association, Inc. Copyright 2016 American Heart Association, Inc.Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e340

Treatment with antimicrobial therapy alone (ie, without
intervention) is associated w ith high mortality rate and
may not prevent aneurysm expansion or rupture6,9,10
a n di st h u sr e s e r v e df o rp a t i e n t sw h oa r en o tc a n d i -
dates for open or endovascular repair or for those in
whom a palliative approach is appropriate. No clinical
trial data are available to de ﬁne the optimal duration of
antimicrobial therapy, whether as solo therapy or asadjunctive therapy to aortic intervention, but expertopinion suggests a duration of at least 6 weeks, andpossibly longer.
5,11Because the response of uncompli-
cated (without rupture or ﬁstulae) infectious aortitis to
antimicrobial therapy may in ﬂuence the choice of
interventional approach, it is also reasonable to havepatients undergo surveillance imaging at intervals
deemed appropriate by a multidisciplinary care team.
9.2.2. Diagnosis and Management of Prosthetic Aortic
Graft Infection
Recommendations for Diagnosis and Manage ment of Prosthetic Aortic Graft Infection
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
Diagnosis
2a B-NR1. In patients with a prosthetic aortic graft, who ha ve signs and symptoms or culture evidence of unex-
plained infection or have unexplaine d gastrointestinal bleeding, cross- sectional imaging is reasonable to
evaluate for an underlying aortic graft infection.1-6
Treatment
2a B-NR2. In patients with an infected prosthetic aortic graf t who are hemodynamically stable and have appropriate
anatomy, it is reasonable to perform open surgery with either in situ reconstruction or extra-anatomic
bypass.7-13
2a B-NR3. In patients with an infected prosthetic aortic graft w ho are hemodynamically unstable, it is reasonable to
perform open surgery with either explant or in situ reconstruction.7
2a C-LD4. In patients with an infected prosthetic aortic graft, endovascular therapy is reasonable, either as bridge
therapy in those with hemodynamic instability or a s long-term therapy in those who are unsuitable
candidates for open surgery.13-15
Late Management
1 C-LD5. In patients who have undergone treatment of an acute prosthetic aortic graft infection, targeted intra-
venous antimicrobial therapy of at least 6 weeks ’duration, with prolonged suppressive oral therapy in
select cases, plus a consultation and follow-up with an infectious disease specialist, isrecommended.
7,11,12,16,17
2b C-LD6. In patients with an infected prosthetic aortic gr aft and either an extensive perigraft abscess or an
infection caused by methicillin-resistant S. aureus ,Pseudomonas aeruginosa ,o ram u l t i d r u g - r e s i s t a n t
microorganism, or who have undergone in situ reconstr uction, lifelong suppressive oral antimicrobial
therapy may be considered after the initial course of therapy.14,15,18,19
Synopsis
Recommendations in this section apply to prosthetic
aortic grafts. This includes tube grafts placed via opensurgery as well as endovascular stent grafts. Althoughthese grafts are typically made with Dacron or polytetra-
ﬂuoroethylene, these recommendations also apply to al-
lografts (eg, cryopreserved aorta) and autografts (eg,femoral vein).Aortic graft infection is uncommon (0.3% –3%).
20-22
E x t e n s i o nt ot h eg r o i ni n c r e a s e st h er i s ko fs u b s e q u e n t
infection. Although some studies suggest a lower risk withendovascular versus open repair, the EVAR-1 (UK Endo-vascular Aneurysm Repair 1) RCT and a large Medicare
analysis found equivalent rates of graft infection.
23-25
Common sources of infection include: contamination at
the time of implantation; graft enteric erosion or ﬁstula toJACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee341

adjacent bowel, esophagus, or airway; or, rarely, hema-
togenous spread from remote infection. Suspicion isusually raised by symptoms, laboratory test abnormal-ities, or axial imaging ﬁndings. In the presence of an
aortic graft infection, no surgical option is clearly supe-
rior. Basic tenets are to remove all infected tissue,
including the graft and surrounding tissue, reconstructionof distal ﬂow either as an extra-anatomic or in situ bypass,
and coverage of the contaminated ﬁe l dw i t ho m e n t u m ,
muscle ﬂaps, or pleura. Previously, extra-anatomic
bypass followed 24 to 48 hours later by graft explantand oversewing of the aortic stump was considered thegold standard for abdominal aortic infection but is usually
n o ta p p r o p r i a t ef o rt h et h o r a c i ca o r t a .A o r t i ca l l o g r a f t s ,
deep vein, and silver-impregnated or rifampin-soakedprosthetic grafts placed in situ have all shown good re-sults as well, often with lower complication rates. A 6-week course of intravenous antibiotics is typically used,sometimes followed by long-term oral suppressivetherapy.
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Early graft infection ( #3 mo) is often associated with
fever and back pain, whereas late graft infections ( >3
mo) may have an insidious onset with symptoms offatigue and malaise, or ma y have fever, an elevated
white blood cell count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate,C-reactive protein, or advanced signs of sepsis withhemodynamic instability or frank hemorrhage from
rupture or ﬁstulae to adjacent bowel, esophagus, or
airway. Because these signs and symptoms arenonspeci ﬁc for site of infection, the initial workup
should include basic blood work, blood cultures, anda x i a li m a g i n g ,p r e f e r a b l yw i t hC T A .I nt h o s ep a t i e n t swith bleeding, endoscopy may be used to rule outother causes and potentially temporize bleeding.Findings of graft infection on CT include peri-graft air,
abscess, in ﬂammatory changes, pseudoaneurysms, or
frank hemorrhage. CTA has a sensitivity of 94% andspeci ﬁc i t yo f8 5 %t o1 0 0 %w i t ha d v a n c e dg r a f ti n f e c -
tion, but the sensitivity is only 64% for those with low-grade infection.
1,2The sensitivity and speci ﬁcity for
low-grade infection may be increased from 77% to 93%and 70% to 89%, respectively, with the use of PET-CT.
3-5MRI, tagged white blood cell scans, or both may
also be useful, depending on local expertise and
availability.6
2. Extra-anatomic bypass with subsequent graft explant,
aortic stump oversewing, and omental coverage has areasonably low rate of reinfection but a relatively highrate of amputation and occlusion and is susceptible tostump blow-out.
7,8In situ venous reconstruction hasthe lowest rate of reinfection but is associated with
long operative times, size mismatch, and lower ex-tremity venous morbidity.
7,9Cryopreserved allografts
have a low rate of reinfection (similar to vein) but aresusceptible to early and late degeneration, may have
limited lengths and diameters, and have limited
availability for emergencies.
7,10,11Rifampin- or silver-
impregnated prosthetic gra fts are more readily avail-
able and faster to implant than vein or extra-anatomicrepair but are more susceptible to reinfection.
7,26
None of these graft options is clearly superior to the
others and, as such, in the stable patient withoutextensive infection with resistant organisms, the use
of any of these is acceptable.
27For those with exten-
sive peri-graft abscess, or infection with methicillin-resistant S. aureus ,Pseudomonas , or multidrug
resistant organisms, extra -anatomic reconstruction
(when feasible) or in situ reconstruction with femoralvein or allograft may offer improved freedom fromreinfection.
7,13,26
3. Hemodynamically unstable patients require emer-
gency proximal control with a clamp or balloon, and
rapid in-line reconstruction, which is best performedwith either an allograft (if immediately available) or asilver- or rifampin-impregnated prosthetic graft.
7
4. Endovascular in tervention allows relatively rapid
control of hemorrhage and may improve survival inpatients with an aorto-enteric ﬁstula, when used as a
bridge to de ﬁnitive therapy.
13-15For patients who are
not candidates for surgical graft excision, endovascular
therapy may be considered for de ﬁnitive therapy, in
which case lifelong antibiotic suppression should beconsidered.
5. Consultation with an infectious disease specialist is
recommended for all patients with aortic graft infec-tion. A 6-week course of in travenous antimicrobial
therapy has been recommended in multiple reports
from high-volume centers and in scienti ﬁc
statements.
7,11,16,17,26,28ForPseudomonas or multidrug
resistant organisms, multiple antimicrobial agents maybe needed. A subsequent course of oral antimicrobialtherapy for 3 to 6 months may be considered depend-ing on the speci ﬁco r g a n i s m ,t h ee x t e n to fi n f e c t i o n ,
and the type of repair.
6. Lifelong suppressive oral antimicrobial therapy has
been suggested for selected patients, such as those
with extensive infection, aggressive organisms, in situprosthetic replacement, or endovascular coveragewithout resection.
14,15,18,19Axial imaging is typically
continued long term to identify evidence of reinfec-tion, such as in ﬂammatory changes, ﬂuid or air col-
lections, or pseudoaneurysm formation.Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e342

9.3. Atherosclerotic Disease
Synopsis
Atherosclerosis is a chronic immunoin ﬂammatory,
ﬁbroproliferative disease of the aorta and its branches
that is propagated by lipids.10This disease process has
multiple risk factors and begins early in life so that the
aorta may develop extensive disease over many de-
cades.11The diagnosis of aortic atherosclerosis may occur
incidentally, during the evaluation of symptomaticvascular events, or both. The size and location of aorticplaques have been associated with embolic complica-tions.
4,7,8,12-16The presence of aortic atheromas has been
signi ﬁcantly associated with all-cause death.9The man-
agement of aortic atheroscler osis includes, in general,
control of risk factors, lifestyle modi ﬁcation, and appro-
priate pharmacological therapies. Although lifestylechanges may be the most important treatment strategy,compliance may be challenging.
17,18
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supporting Text
1. Patients with aortic atherosclerosis often have
concomitant cardiovascular diseases such as coronaryartery disease, atrial ﬁbrillation, and PAD. These
concomitant conditions fre quently determine the se-
lection of guideline-based antiplatelet agents, antico-agulant agents, or both.
1-3
2. The indications for statin therapy in patients with a
history of coronary artery disease, myocardial infarc-tion, and stroke are well established.
5,6The data for
statin therapy speci ﬁc to aortic atherosclerosis alone
are very limited. Therefore, this recommendation has
been made for those patients at risk for or with
conﬁrmed coronary artery di sease because the avail-
able data best support statin therapy in this cohort.
3. Atherosclerotic disease of the aortic arch is a potential
source of emboli to the brain.1,2,9A prospective study
(N¼500) showed that the OR for stroke among patientswith aortic atheromatous plaques (atheromas) of $4
mm versus controls was 9.1 (95% CI, 3.3 –25.2;
P<0.001).7Moreover, in a clinical trial of 519 patients
with severe thoracic aortic plaques, multivariate anal-ysis showed that statin therapy was protective against
strokes ( P¼0.0001).
8(The data from these 2 studies
relate speci ﬁcally to atheroma thickness of $4 mm,
which does not align precisely with the mostcommonly used grading systems for severity of aorticatherosclerosis, which de ﬁne severe atheromas by a
thickness of >5 mm.) Although antiplatelet therapy is
commonly used in patients with aortic atheromas,there is no evidence to support the use of prophylactic
anticoagulation in this population.
9.3.1. Aortic Thrombus
Aortic mural thrombus is typically associated with un-
derlying aortic pathology, such as aneurysm, aortitis,atherosclerosis, dissection, and aortic graft material.
1-3
Because such thrombi arise in the setting of underlyingaortic pathology, the thrombi can be considered “sec-
ondary, ”and they most often appear in the descending
thoracic and abdominal aorta.
1-3In contrast, “primary ”
thrombus occurs in a normal or minimally atherosclerotic
aorta and, rather than being mural, are often peduncu-lated and protrude into the aortic lumen. Most often,primary aortic thrombi are idiopathic, but some have beenassociated with hypercoagulable states (eg, malignancy,heparin-induced thrombocytopenia, and the anti-phospholipid syndrome).
2-6
Aortic thrombus is most often asymptomatic but may
present with limb ischemia, visceral ischemia, or stroke2-7
from embolization. The diagnosis is often typically
conﬁrmed by either CTA or TEE.8,9Asymptomatic pa-
tients with secondary mural thrombus are usuallyRecommendations for Atherosclerotic Disease
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 C-LD1. In patients with aortic atherosclerotic disease an d concomitant coronary artery disease, PAD or both, it is
recommended to prescribe antiplate let therapy, anticoagulant therapy or both, guided by the clinical
setting.1-3
2a C-LD2. In patients with aortic atherosclerotic disease and risk factors for con ﬁrmed coronary artery disease, it is
reasonable to prescribe a moderate- or high-intensity statin.4-6
2b C-LD3. In patients with aortic atheromas of a thickness ‡4 mm, statin therapy may be reasonable.1,7-9JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee343

managed conservatively, but p atients with primary aortic
thrombus or those presenting with embolic events areoften managed with anticoagulation, endovascular inter-vention, or open surgical therapy; such treatments areinformed by the patient ’s history and the location, size,
and mobility of the thrombus.
2-7,10,11Long-term anti-
coagulation is most often considered in patients withthrombus in the ascending aorta and aortic arch, becauseof the increased risk of stroke from potential embolization
should aortic thrombus recur.
5-7,10
9.3.2. Aortic Occlusion
Aortic occlusion, which occurs most often secondary to
extensive atherosclerotic disease, can present along aspectrum of acute and chronic clinical courses. CTA ismost useful in identifying the occlusion, determining itscause, and de ﬁning the extent of associated aortic and
branch arterial disease. Aortic occlusion typically occursbelow the renal arteries but rarely can arise above thislevel, leading to renal and possibly visceral malperfusion.
Treatment in acute presentati ons is typically surgical,
including open embolectomy in the setting of embolus oraorto-iliac and femoral reconst ruction for atherosclerotic
occlusion.
1Chronic aortic occlusion can occasionally be
asymptomatic because collateral circulation has devel-oped, in which case intervention may not be required.More commonly, patients with chronic aortic occlusionpresent with lower extremit y claudication that may be
accompanied by buttock claudication, central core muscle
weakness, and impotence in males caused by pelvicmalperfusion. These patients often have cardiopulmo-nary comorbidities and multifocal atherosclerotic disease,and these issues should be addressed preoperatively tomitigate potential complications.
Revascularization options include endovascular,
2open
aortic (eg, aortobifemoral bypass),3or extra-anatomic (eg,
axillofemoral bypass), and hybrid options (eg, iliofemoral
endarterectomy and patch plus iliac stenting). Thepreferred revascularization strategy is informed by the
arterial anatomy, the severity of disease and symptoms,the patient ’s substrate, and the expected procedural
durability. No RCTs have shown an advantage for anygiven revascularization proc edure, and all perform well inearly follow-up. Open aortic reconstruction has improved
long-term patency compared with less invasive options
3
b u ta tac o s to fah i g h e rr i s ko fp e r i o p e r a t i v ecomplications.
9.3.3. Porcelain Aorta
“Porcelain ”aorta refers to the extensive, eggshell-like,
near-circumferential or circumferential calci ﬁcation of
the intima or media of the aortic wall in the ascendingaorta or aortic arch. It is most often associated with late-stage atherosclerosis, although it can also be a lateconsequence of aortitis. It generally occurs in older pa-tients with atherosclerotic disease elsewhere and carriesan increased risk for cardiovascular events and mortality.
1
Porcelain aorta is best seen on a noncontrast CT scan,
although very thin calci ﬁcation may only be detected
intraoperatively with epi-aortic ultrasound or manualpalpation.
Impenetrable ascending aortic calci ﬁcation makes it
difﬁcult, if not impossible, to perform central aortic can-
nulation for cardiopulmonary bypass, the anastomosis ofproximal coronary bypass grafts to the aorta, aortotomyduring aortic valve replacement, and graft-aorta anasto-
moses during aortic replacement. Additionally, perform-
ing aortic cross-clamping for cardiopulmonary bypass can
crack the calci ﬁed wall, increasing the risk of stroke from
embolization, or immediate exsanguination. Surgicalmanagement strategies have included use of alternatives i t e sf o rc a n n u l a t i o na n dp r o x i m a lb y p a s sg r a f t sw i t ho f f -pump or beating heart techniques,
2-4balloon occlusion of
the aorta,5and the use of circulatory arrest with
ascending aortic replacement.6
9.4. Coarctation of the Aorta (CoA) and Congenital
Abnormalities of the Arch
CoA is a narrowing of the aorta occurring most often
just distal to the left subclavian artery, typically withan aneurysmal aortic segment immediately beyond thestenosis, but variants are frequent.
1Signi ﬁcant CoA
presents with upper extremity hypertension and lowerextremity hypotension ( Table 37 ). MRI and CT are both
useful to evaluate the extent of aortic narrowing and
dilation, as well as the presence of collaterals,
2whereas
TABLE 37 Criteria for Signi ﬁcant CoA11,28
The presence of signi ﬁcant CoA is based on evidence of upper extremity hypertension (at rest, on ambulatory BP monitoring, or with pathologic blood pressure response
to exercise) or left ventricular hypertrophy and evidence for 1 of these gradient measurements:
1. A noninvasive blood pressure difference of >20 mm Hg between the upper and lower extremities
2. A peak-to-peak gradient of >20 mm Hg across the coarct by catheterization; or a peak-to-peak gradient of >10 mm Hg across the coarct by catheterization
in the setting of decreased left ventr icular systolic function or signi ﬁcant collateral ﬂow
3. A mean gradient of >20 mm Hg across the coarct by Doppler echocardiography; or a mean gradient of >10 mm Hg across the coarct by Doppler
echocardiography in the setting of decreased left ventricular systolic function or signi ﬁcant collateral ﬂow
CoA indicates coarctation of the aorta.Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e344

TTE is useful for evaluating the gradient across the
CoA, as well as identifying a coexisting BAV (present in50%) and other potential congenital defects.
3Untreated
CoA may be complicated by aortic dissection, heartfailure, ruptured cerebral aneurysm, distal hypo-
perfusion, or the consequences of signi ﬁcant hyper-
tension. Late complicati ons following surgical or
endovascular CoA repair may include undersized grafts,recurrent stenosis, aneurysm or pseudoaneurysm for-mation, and rupture, which are typically treated withendovascular procedures unless anatomic featuresdictate open or hybrid surgery.
4-11Hypertension is
common after CoA repair, especially during exercise,
and when the repair is performed in adults.12,13
Ambulatory BP monitoring and exercise testing are
useful in diagnosis and management.12,13Patients with
CoA undergo lifelong follow-up and imaging because ofthe associated cardiovascular risks and the potential
requirement for repeat intervention.6,14
An aberrant subclavian artery (ASCA) is commonly an
incidental ﬁnding but may present with compressive
symptoms (including dysphagia and dyspnea) because it
courses posterior to the esophagus and trachea and may
associate with aneurysm disease.15-18A normal left aortic
arch with a right ASCA occurs in w1% of the population,
whereas a right aortic arch w ith a left ASCA is much rarer
and may form a vascular ring.17,18Dilation of the origin of
either a right or left ASCA occurs in 20% to 60% of casesand is known as a Kommerell diverticulum.
15,18Such
Kommerell diverticula may lead to aortic dissection,
rupture, or embolization.18-20Indications for treatment of
ASCA relate to symptoms and aneurysm size.
9.4.1. Coarctation of the Aorta
Recommendations for CoA
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement .
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 B-NR1. In patients with CoA, including those who have unde rgone surgical or endovascular intervention, an MRI
or CT is recommended for initial, surveillance, and follow-up aortic imaging.1-4
1 C-EO2. In patients with CoA, BPs should be measured in both arms and one of the lower extremities.
1 B-NR3. In patients with signi ﬁcant native or recurrent CoA ( Table 37 ) and hypertension, endovascular stenting or
open surgical repair of the coarctation is recommended.2,3,5-12
1 C-EO4. In patients with CoA, guideline-directed medical therapy is recommended for the treatment of
hypertension.13
2b B-NR5. In adult patients with CoA, screening for intra cranial aneurysms by MRI or CT may be reasonable.14-18
Synopsis
CoA may have many anatomic variants and occurs most
commonly at the level of the ductus arteriosus and distal tothe left subclavian artery. Echocardiogram is indicated inthe evaluation of patients with CoA because a BAV coexists
in at least 50% of cases, and CoA may associate with com-
plex congenital heart disease.
4Upper extremity hyperten-
sion and lower extremity hypoperfusion are the hallmarksof CoA. Intracranial aneurysms may occur in adults withCoA.
14-16Ascending aortic aneurysms may occur in those
with BAV, and aneurysms may be present in the distal archand descending aorta.
2,11,19,20Untreated CoA may be
complicated by aortic dissection, heart failure, ruptured
cerebral aneurysm, or complications from hypertension.
Repair of CoA is performed by endovascular, open surgical,and hybrid procedures, depending on patient-speci ﬁca n d
anatomic features.2,3,5,8-12In patients with previous pro-
cedures, late complications ma y include recurrent stenosis,
aneurysm or pseudoaneurysm formation, rupture, and
persistent hypertension.2,3,6,8,12,21Hypertension is com-
mon after CoA repair, especially during exercise, and
ambulatory monitoring and exe rcise testing may be useful
in diagnosis and management.3,6,7,22-24Lifelong clinical
and imaging follow-up is important to evaluate for hyper-tension, recurrent coarctation, and aortic wall abnormal-ities after repair.
1,2,6,24
Recommendation-Speci ﬁcS u p p o r t i v eT e x t
1. In patients with CoA, both MRI and CT are can detect
coexistent BAV, examine the full thoracic aorta forJACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee345

coexistent aneurysm disease or arch abnormalities,
and assist in treatment planning.4,25TTE is also can
d e t e c tt h eg r a d i e n t sa c r o s st h es i t eo ft h ec o a r c t a t i o nand assess for recoarctation (recurrence of a signi ﬁcant
coarct). After repair of CoA, complications may occur,
including recoarctation, aortic aneurysm, pseudoa-
neurysm, and aortic dissection.
2,3,11,12,26Arch and
descending aortic complications are better visualizedby MRI or CT than TTE. The optimal imaging frequencyafter repair of CoA is not well established and is bestindividualized based on the type of repair, physicalexamination ﬁndings, and previous imaging ﬁndings.
27
After establishing stable aortic imaging after CoA
repair, surveillance imaging is often obtained every 3
to 5 years.20,28-30Recoarctation occurs in about 10%6,8
after surgical repair and about 8% after balloon dila-
tion.21After endovascular repair of CoA, MRI or CT can
evaluate for complications, recoarctation, orendoleaks.
2,3,11
2. Patients with a signi ﬁcant CoA typically have hyper-
t e n s i o ni nt h eu p p e re x t r e m i t i e sa n dar e d u c t i o ni nB P
in the lower extremities. The location of the CoA will
inform any BP differential between the left and rightarms. Physical examination may reveal a delay intiming and a decreased amplitude of the femoral pulse.After CoA repair, recurrent coarctation may occur.Obtaining the BP in the upper and lower extremitiesassesses for native and recurrent coarctation.
3. CoA presents with upper extremity hypertension, lower
extremity hypoperfusion, and imaging con ﬁrmation of
narrowing of the aorta that may include collateral for-mation.
2,3,6,11Signi ﬁcant native or recoarctation has
been variably de ﬁned, but commonly used criteria are
listed in Table 37 .7,11The presence of left ventricular
hypertrophy is an important marker of disease.28In
addition to abnormal aortic gradients, anatomic evi-dence for CoA is necessary and is well characterized by
MRI or CT. Adult congenital guidelines have reported
the best evidence to proceed with intervention to cor-rect CoA, including hypertension, BP differential be-tween upper and lower extremities, and TTE-derivedgradients across the coarctation.
11For individuals with
native or recurrent CoA and appropriate anatomiccharacteristics, endovascular treatment with stenting istypically performed.
2,3,6,9-12 ,29Open surgical repair of
CoA may include subclavian ﬂap aortoplasty, resection
and end-to-end anastomosis, interposition grafting, or
bypass grafting, with the choice of procedure informedby patient- and anatomic-speci ﬁcc h a r a c t e r i s t i c s .
5,11In
adults who have undergone a previous open surgicalCoA repair and develop recoarctation, aneurysm, orpseudoaneurysm, an endovascular approach (assumingthere is adequate iliofemoral access and absence ofinvolvement of the supra-aortic trunks) avoids the need
for reoperation.
2,3,9,12,29
4. Patients with CoA are at risk for complications of hy-
pertension, including heart failure, stroke, coronaryartery disease, and aortic complications, so hyperten-sion should be assessed and in accordance with currentguidelines.
13Multiple studies have shown that persis-
tent hypertension is common after CoAcorrection.
3,6,7,23,24Ambulatory BP monitoring and
exercise testing may be useful in the evaluation and
treatment of hypertension in patients with native CoAand after repair.
3,22,24
5. Screening studies suggest that adults with CoA have an
10% prevalence of intracranial aneurysms (comparedwith a prevalence of 2% in the normal adult popula-tion), with the greatest risk among older adults andthose with hypertension.
14-16 ,18Cost-effective analysis
supports screening for intracranial aneurysms in adults
with CoA, but preferred screening strategies remainunknown.
17Because many of the intracranial aneu-
rysms detected by screening will be very small and notrequire treatment, shared decision-making aboutscreening may be informed by age, risk factors, andanticoagulation considerations.
18,30
9.4.2. Other Arch Abnormalities
9.4.2.1. Aberrant Subclavian Artery, Kommerell ’s
Diverticulum
Recommendations for Aberrant Subclavian Artery, Kommerell ’s Diverticulum
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
2a C-LD1. In patients discovered to have an ASCA in the absence of thoracic aortic imaging, dedicated imaging to
assess for TAA is reasonable.1,2
2b C-LD2. In patients with Kommerell ’s diverticulum, depending on patient anatomy and comorbidities, repair may
be reasonable when the diverticulum ori ﬁce is >3.0 cm, the combined diameter of the diverticulum and
adjacent descending aorta is >5.0 cm, or both ( Figure 27 ).3Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e346

Synopsis
Anomalies of the aortic ar ch are usually detected
incidentally on a CT of the chest or neck ordered foro t h e rr e a s o n s .A nA S C Aa r i s e sa st h ef o u r t hb r a n c hfrom the aorta, distal to the left subclavian artery (or
right subclavian artery in the case of a right-sided
aortic arch). It courses thr ough the posterior medias-
tinum behind the esophagus in its path to perfuse thearm and can cause a vascular ring around the tracheaand esophagus that results in dysphagia, respiratorysymptoms, or recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy. Kom-merell ’s diverticulum is a persistent remnant of the
fourth primitive dorsal aortic arch because of failed
regression
3and may be present in 20% to 60% of pa-
tients with an aberrant right or left subclavian artery.The risk of rupture or dissection of a Kommerell ’s
d i v e r t i c u l u mh a sb e e nr e p o r t e dt ob ea sh i g ha s5 0 %i ncase series, although high-quality data on the naturalhistory are very limited. Th e 2020 SVS clinical practice
guidelines recommend surgical intervention for Kom-merell ’s diverticulum when the diverticulum ori ﬁce is
>3.0 cm, the combined diameter of the diverticulum
and adjacent descending aorta is >5.0 cm, or both.
4
Successful repair has been described using open,
endovascular, and hybrid approaches depending onpatient anatomy and comorbidities.
3,5
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. Variant aortic arch anatomy has been found to be
signi ﬁcantly associated with TAA in several single-
center retrospective observational series,1with 33%
of patients with right-sided aortic arch havingconcomitant TAA.
2Left-sided aortic arch with aber-
rant right subclavian artery was also signi ﬁcantly
associated with TAD but only occurred in 2% to 8%FIGURE 27 Measurements of Kommerell ’sD i v e r t i c u l u m
Two diameter measurements should be obtained using cross-sectional
imaging: the diverticulum ori ﬁce (radially and longitudinally at the
aortic wall) and the combined diameter of the diverticulum and adja-
cent descending thoracic aorta (measured from the apex of the
diverticulum to the opposite aortic wall). ARSA indicates aberrant rightsubclavian artery; LCA, left common carotid artery; LSA, left subclavian
artery; and RCA, right common carotid artery. Adapted from Erben
et al,
8Copyright 2020, with permission from Elsevier, Inc., and the
Society for Vascular Surgery.JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee347

of those patients.1Consequently, if the imaging
study that detected the ASCA did not include imag-ing of the thoracic aorta, then a dedicated CT or MRIto evaluate for an associated aortic aneurysm isreasonable.
2. Case series have reported rupture and/or dissection of
Kommerell ’s diverticulum for diverticula ranging from
4 . 0c mt o1 0c m( m e a ns i z e ,5 . 0c m ) .
3The measure-
ment of the Kommerell ’sd i v e r t i c u l u mm a yb ed i f ﬁ-
cult, and various strategies to standardize measureshave been proposed.
3Based on CT, 2 diameter mea-
surements should be obtained ( Figure 27 )u s i n gc r o s s -sectional imaging: the diverticulum ori ﬁce (radially
and longitudinally at the aortic wall) and the com-bined diameter of the diverticulum and adjacentdescending thoracic aorta (measured from the tip ofthe diverticulum to the opposite aortic wall
6). Repair
of Kommerell ’s diverticulum has been suggested
when the ori ﬁce diameter is >3c m o r t h e c o m b i n e d
diameter of the diverticulu m and adjacent descending
thoracic aorta is >5.0 cm.3,4,7
9.4.2.2. Aberrant Left Vertebral Artery Origin
Recommendation for Aberrant Left Vertebral Artery Origin
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
2a C-EO1. In patients with an aberrant left vertebral artery ori gin arising directly from the thoracic aorta who require
aortic repair involving reconstruction or coverage of th e vertebral artery origin, revascularization of the
vertebral artery is reasonable.
Synopsis
The most common anatomic variant for the left verte-
bral artery is arising directly from the aortic arch; 6% ofadults have a left vertebral artery that arises from the archbetween the left carotid and left subclavian arteries,
1,2
rather than of a branch of the left subclavian artery.
There is a paucity of data on the management of the leftvertebral artery arising from the aortic arch in patientsu n d e r g o i n gt h o r a c i ca o r t i cr e p a i r .F o rp a t i e n t su n d e r g o i n gelective open surgical partial or total arch repair or un-dergoing TEVAR for TAA or dissection, revascularizationof the left subclavian artery is recommended to preserveleft vertebral artery perfusion and reduce the risk of
symptomatic vertebrobasilar insuf ﬁciency, SCI, and
stroke.
3This may be particularly important in patients
with a dominant left vertebral artery or a nonintact circle
of Willis. Vertebral artery revascularization via either anopen bypass or transposition technique can be accom-
plished with good outcomes.3,4
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. In patients undergoing elective TEVAR with planned left
subclavian artery coverage, preoperative revasculariza-
tion of the left subclavian artery has been shown todecrease the risk of stroke and SCI,
5-8presumably by
maintaining perfusion through the posterior circulationvia the left vertebral artery. In a small series of 9 patientswith an aberrant left vertebra l artery origin undergoing
open aortic arch replacement, no neurologic complica-tions were reported among patients who ﬁrst underwent
revascularization of the left vertebral artery.
4
9.4.2.3. Bovine Arch (Common Innominate
and Left Carotid Artery)
Recommendation for Bovine Arch (Common Innominate and Left Carotid Artery)
COR LOE RECOMMENDATION
2b C-LD1. In patients with bovine arch (common innominate and left carotid artery), imaging to assess for TAA may
be reasonable.1-3Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e348

Synopsis
The most common anatomic pattern of great vessel
origin, occurring in approximately 70% of adults, is a typeI arch, in which the 3 great vessels originate directly fromthe aorta.
4Bovine arch variants are the most common
arch anomalies, and 2 types are described: In type II-A,
found in 9% of the population, the left common carotidartery arises directly from the innominate artery(Figure 28 ); in type II-B, found in 13% of the population,
the innominate and left common carotid arteries arisef r o mac o m m o no r i g i n( Figure 28 ).
5The term “bovine
arch ”is a misnomer, because the arch vasculature in
cattle has a single, large brachiocephalic vessel that sub-
sequently trifurcates into 2 subclavian arteries and a
bicarotid trunk.5Others have referred to the bovine aortic
arch pattern as an aortic arch with a common origin of theinnominate and left carotid artery.
Some authors have suggested that a bovine arch in-
creases the risk of aortic dissection, but the data arelimited.
2,6Among patients with acute type A aortic
dissection, a bovine arch was highly predictive of an arch
tear (OR, 5.9; 95% CI, 2.89 –12.04; P<0.001) and increased
perioperative stroke (OR, 2.69; 95% CI, 1.2 –6.0; P¼0.016)
based on multivariable analysis, although it was notassociated with worse l ong-term survival.
7Recommendation-Speci ﬁcS u p p o r t i v eT e x t
1. A bovine aortic arch appears to be a marker for TAD and
more rapid aortic expansion.1Among patients with
T A D ,t h ep r e v a l e n c eo fab o v i n ea r c hw a s2 6 . 3 % ,compared with 16.4% in controls ( P<0.001). Moreover,
among patients with TAA, the annual aortic growth ratewas 0.29 cm/y among those with a bovine arch versus0.09 cm/y among those with normal arch anatomy. A
recent meta-analysis found that the proportion of TAD
among patients with bovine arch was 41.5%, comparedwith 34.0% among patients with standard arch con ﬁg-
uration.
3If aortic dilation or aneurysm is found on
imaging, subsequent surveillance imaging may beobtained.
9.5. Tumors
Tumors of the thoracic aorta are usually secondary,
resulting from contiguous or m etastatic spread of primary
malignancies, especially lung and esophageal.
1,2Primary
malignant tumors of the aorta, which are extremely rare,are most often primary sarcomas that protrude into thelumen but leave the aortic wall intact. Aortic sarcomas areaggressive tumors with a prope nsity for arterial emboli-
zation, disseminated metas tases, and rapid clinicalFIGURE 28 Normal and Bovine Aortic Arch Con ﬁgurations
(A)Type I aortic arch: The normal aortic arch con ﬁguration. (B)Type II-A aortic arch: The left common carotid artery originates from the innominate artery. (C)Type II-B
aortic arch: The innominate and left common carotid arteries share a common origin. LCA indicates left common carotid artery; LSA, left subclavian ar tery; LVA, left
vertebral artery; RCA, right common carotid artery; RSA, right subclavian artery; and RVA, right vertebral artery. Adapted from Layton et al.5Copyright 2006, American
Society of Neuroradiology. Used with permission from Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research, all rights reserved.JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee349

deterioration,3,4usually with limited survival after initial
diagnosis.5,6Tumors of the thoraco abdominal aorta may
exhibit nonspeci ﬁc symptoms. On imaging, aortic tumors
are often initially mistaken for atherosclerosis or aneu-rysmal disease
7(although PET imaging may suggest tu-
mor metabolic activity over metabolically quiescent
atherosclerosis), so the diagnosis is often made by histo-logic examination of embolic debris or surgical speci-mens
8-10; in some cases, the diagnosis is madepostmortem. Combined thera py with surgery (resection
and reconstruction of the segm ent of aorta containing the
neoplasm) and chemoradiotherapy provide the best sur-v i v a lr e s u l t s ,a l t h o u g ht h eo v e r a l lp r o g n o s i sr e m a i n spoor.
10. PHYSICAL ACTIVITY AND QUALITY OF LIFE
Recommendations for Physical Activity and Quality of Life
COR LOE RECOMMENDATIONS
1 C-EO1. For patients with signi ﬁcant aortic disease, education and guidance should be provided about avoiding
intense isometric exercises (eg, heavy weightlifting or activities requiring the Valsalva maneuver), burst
exertion and activities, and collision sports.1,2
1 C-EO2. For patients who have undergone surgery for aorti c aneurysm or dissection, postoperative cardiac
rehabilitation is recommended.3,4
2a C-LD3. In patients with thoracic or abdominal aortic a neurysms whose BP is adequately controlled, it is
reasonable to encourage 30 to 60 minutes of mild-to-m oderate intensity aerobic activity at least 3 to 4
days per week.5,6
2a C-LD4. For patients with clinically signi ﬁcant aortic disease, it is reasonable to screen for anxiety, depression,
and posttraumatic stress disorder and, when indicated, provide resources for support7,8;i ti sa l s o
reasonable to provide education and resources to minimize patients ’concerns, support optimal decision-
making, and enhance quality of life.5,9-11
Synopsis
As surgical outcomes for aortic disease improve, a focus
on patient-reported health-related quality of life (HRQOL)outcomes is becoming increasingly important,
10because
patients have become incr easingly concerned about
HRQOL issues such as returning to work, pain manage-
ment, risk of infection, activity recommendations and re-strictions, and neurologic complications. The mostcommon measures of HRQOL are generic patient-reportedoutcome measures (eg, SF-36), although validatedaneurysm-speci ﬁc measures have been developed.
7,12,13
In patients with Marfan syndrome in the GenTAC reg-
istry, HRQOL was slightly below the population norm.
Better HRQOL was independently associated with socio-
economic factors (eg, private insurance, active employ-ment) but not factors related to disease severity orcomorbidities.
14,15Although aneurysms are usually
asymptomatic before diagnosi s, surgical aortic repair is
associated with an initial deterioration in HRQOL at 3months, including decreased physical, cognitive, and so-cial function that generally returns to preoperative levels
after 6 to 12 months.
11Standardized reporting of preop-
erative and postoperative HRQOL measures is needed toguide further improvements in interventional strategies
and improve the overall patient experience.
16Patients with aortic aneurysms, who have adequate BP
control, may have improvements in overall cardiovascularhealth when undertaking mode rate intensity aerobic ac-
tivity at least 3 to 4 days per week, 30 to 60 minutes persession.
17-19Although resistance training may be bene ﬁcial
to patients with cardiovascul ar disease, it increases cen-
tral aortic BP and, therefore, bene ﬁts for those with aortic
aneurysm are less well understood because, theoretically,increases in BP could contribute to subsequent aorticgrowth, complications, or both. Further longitudinal studyis warranted.
20-22
Recommendation-Speci ﬁc Supportive Text
1. In patients with aortic disease, limited data are avail-
able to guide recommendations regarding the forms ofe x e r c i s et h a ta r es a f ea n dp r o m o t ec a r d i o v a s c u l a rhealth versus those that pose an acute or long-term riskof aortic growth or rupture. But evidence existsregarding the physiologic bene ﬁts of exercise and the
hemodynamic consequences of various form of exerciseand exertion in case series and relevant animal models.
There has been a uniform consensus among numerous
expert committees on aortic disease that it is wise toavoid intense isometric exertion or exercises thatrequire the Valsalva maneuver, given that heavy liftingIsselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e350

with Valsalva can produce acute increases in SBP to
>300 mm Hg. There is also a consensus that light
weightlifting and low-inten sity aerobic exercise are
safe and likely improve both physical and mentalhealth. No uniform consensu se x i s t sa b o u tt h es a f e t y
of intermediate-level static and aerobic exercise. Rec-
ommendations for exercise intensity are best individ-ualized, informed by mult iple factors that include
underlying aortic pathology, aortic diameter and ASI,aortic growth rate, age, family history, and any otherhigh-risk features (eg, uncontrolled hypertension).Ongoing investigation is needed to better de ﬁne the
levels of resistance activities that would be considered
low-risk for adverse aortic events, favoring greater
exercise restrictions among patients at higher risk ofdissection.
17,23-26 ,27
2. Although data are limited, cardiac rehabilitation has
been shown to be useful and safe for patients afteraortic surgery.
4,5,27,28A randomized trial of exercise-
based cardiac rehabilitation in patients who have un-dergone surgery for type A aortic dissection showed
improved peak oxygen uptake, maximal workload, and
HRQOL.
3Fear of a repeat cardiac event can cause pa-
tients who are post –aortic dissection to decrease or
stop exercise and sexual activity, but mild-to-moderate intensity exercis e may be cardioprotective.
Because of deconditioning, patients may be unable toexercise initially at the recommended level.
27An in-
tensity of 3 to 5 metabolic equivalents of task is rec-
ommended, while avoiding strenuous lifting, lifting to
the point of exhaustion, or other activities that entailmaximal exertion.
6,29In a retrospective study, patients
with small AAA went through a modi ﬁed cardiac
rehabilitation program before surgery, and the rate ofaortic growth was slower in the rehabilitation group.
28
3. High-intensity athletic training in 1 study has been
shown to be an independent predictor of aortic growth,
although these data were limited to the aortic root and
did not include AAA.30In a recent study in 442 athletes
of mean age 61 years, aortic root enlargement by z-score was present in 24% of participants and, aftermultivariate analysis, elite competitor status wasfound to be an independent predictor of aorticgrowth.
31Less is known about the potential effects of
mild-to-moderate intensity aerobic activity on aortic
growth, but it is known to improve overall cardiovas-
cular health, including among patients with TAA32-34
and AAA.20,35,36A recent meta-analysis suggests that
that higher physical activity is associated with areduced risk of AAA.
37In 1 study of a mouse model of
Marfan syndrome, rates of aortic root growth weresigni ﬁcant slower in mice that exercised daily on a
treadmill compared with sedentary mice.
38In another
study of mice with Marfan syndrome, both mild andmoderate —but not strenuous —aerobic exercise pro-
tected the structural integrity of the aortic wall, asevidenced by reduced elastin fragmentation andreduced expression of matri x metalloproteinases 2 and
9 within the aortic wall, compared with sedentary
controls.
39
4. Depression and anxiety often occur in patients with
aortic disease, regardless of surgical status. Post-traumatic stress disorder after dissection is a particularrisk.
8Screening patients and providing resources for
assistance may prevent mental health issues frombecoming more severe and lead to an increasedHRQOL.
9,40The SF-36 is a common tool for assessing
mental health for these patients7,11,12,41but may not
cover all patient concerns, such as activity restriction,family life, and losing ability to earn income.
16More
studies are needed with both pre- and postoperativeHRQOL data to improve shared decision-making andpatient outcomes.
12,13,41Exercise may decrease
depression.9Education before procedures helps most
patients feel more satis ﬁed with their procedures16and
improve postoperative HRQOL.41Patients and clini-
cians can de ﬁne surgery success differently, showing
the importance of discussing expectations and risks.
11. COST AND VALUE CONSIDERATIONS
Although assessment of cost and value in development ofguidelines is of growing importance, studies are limited
on the cost-effectiveness of a ortic disease treatment and
lack standard methods for comparison.
1
Screening for AAA among men $65 years of age has
been shown to be cost-effective,2,3although data for
screening women are less clear. Women have a lowerincidence of AAA but higher ris k of rupture and longer life
expectancy, so incremental cost-effectiveness is similarto men and may justify screening, especially in those with
a history of smoking.
4
In patients with AAA, studies comparing EVAR to open
surgical repair generally show lower initial costs for EVARbased on shorter hospital stays; however, ongoing ex-penses for EVAR surveillanc e and reinterventions may
minimize long-term cost advantages after 2 to 5 years.
5-9
In addition, signi ﬁcant variability in costs across organi-
zations and countries, and changing ef ﬁciencies in tech-
niques, makes it dif ﬁcult to make recommendations on
preferred interventional a pproaches based primarily on
relative costs.6,10,11
Findings are mixed but similar for descending TAA,
with trends toward lower ini tial hospital costs with
TEVAR compared with open surgery stemming fromshorter length of stay, but the long-term results are moreneutral.
12-14JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee351

Few data examine the cost-effectiveness of manage-
ment strategies of TAA. For the management of AAS, thecosts are not easily modi ﬁable. However, for management
of chronic TAD, patients often see a host of specialists,including both cardiologists and surgeons, have follow-up
visits with specialists in both the community and at ter-
tiary or quaternary centers, or both. Moreover, diagnosticimaging is often duplicated because of differences inimaging protocols or quality, or simply because imagesare not readily transferrable. Consequently, there arelikely opportunities for signi ﬁcant cost savings if redun-
dant clinician visits and imaging could be reducedthrough common protocols, common imaging platforms,
a n dc o o r d i n a t e dc a r e .
15
12. EVIDENCE GAPS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Most of the current recommendations for patients with
aortic disease are based on expert opinion and data from
observational studies, large registries, and prospective
studies, but few are from randomized clinical trials. Moredata are needed from basic science studies and RCTs toguide prevention, early diagnosis, and advanced treat-ment for aortic disease. In the future, precision medicine
a n dp a t i e n t - c e n t e r e da p p r o a c h es will enable clinicians to
develop care plans to optimize outcomes for each patient.Future research should incl ude diverse populations and
examine race, ethnicity, and sex differences to ensure
that all patient groups are represented and that questionspertinent to their aortic health are answered.
12.1. Biomarker Studies
Although interest in using circulating biomarkers for risk
strati ﬁcation of patients with aortopathy has increased,
biomarker expression has not been clearly associated withrelevant clinical aortic events. Most studies have focusedon protein-based biomarkers and noncoding RNAs in pa-tients with bicuspid aortopathy. These emerging bio-
markers and other better, early-stage biomarkers, along
with advanced noninvasive imaging modalities, may helpus precisely identify the ri sk associated with adverse
outcomes in these patients. In addition, noncoding RNAssuch as microRNA are biological molecules whoseexpression can be modi ﬁed through targeted mechanisms
and present opportunities to identify new treatment op-tions for patients with aortic disease.
1-7In addition,
developing image-based cardiac and aortic markers
derived from large-scale imag ing studies with automated
machine learning –based analysis might provide a wealth
of information for guiding the optimal care of thesepatients.12.2. Genetic and Nongenetic Factors
Various genes have been associated with and linked to
TAA and dissection. Consequently, genetic testing can
identify pathogenic mutations in speci ﬁcg e n e st h a ti n -
crease a patient ’s risk of aneurysm, dissection, or both
and may inform the optimal timing of aortic repair. As theprevalence of genetic testing increases, the discovery ofmore genes will help in the earlier diagnosis of asymp-tomatic nonsyndromic TAA. In addition to the contribu-tion of genetic variants, environmental factors andlifestyle habits may contribute to aortic aneurysm for-
mation. Further research on these factors may provide
evidence to guide lifestyle modi ﬁcations that could
reduce a patient ’s lifelong aortic risk. Recent evidence
suggests that ﬂuoroquinolone use is associated with an
increased risk of aortic aneurysm and dissection, but thepathways through which this effect is mediated are un-known. Future research investigating the potentiallyprotective or harmful effects of other pharmacologic
agents on aortic health might further elucidate the path-
ophysiology of aortic disease.
1-10
12.3. Biomechanics of the Aorta
Emerging evidence suggests that aortic diameter alone is
an insuf ﬁcient predictor of risk for aortic dissection. Un-
derstanding the distribution of biomechanical wall stress
in the various anatomic locations of the aorta, as well as
potential contributions of hemodynamic ﬂow distur-
bances such as those from aortic valve stenosis or regur-gitation, or even from a well-functioning BAV, mayimprove risk strati ﬁcation strategies and, in turn, patient
outcomes, ﬁlling a knowledge gap on wall stress distri-
bution in patients with aortic aneurysms.
1-4
12.4. Sex, Race, and Ethnicity
Conﬂicting data exist in the literature on the association
between sex and outcome in patients with aortic disease.Studies have shown different rates of aortic aneurysmgrowth and dissection risk in male versus female patients.Nevertheless, the data are inconsistent, because someoutcome studies indicate that sex affects prognosis,
whereas others show no impact of sex. Clearly, further
research is needed to elucidate the impact of sex on theincidence and progression of aortic disease, the risk ofaortic dissection, and the out comes of intervention. Even
more challenging is the fact that few studies have beenpublished on racial and ethnic disparities among patientswith aortic disease and those undergoing aortic inter-vention. Moreover, it is unclear that all patients with
aortic disease have equal access to skilled practitioners to
care for them, so it is imperative that we seek ways toIsselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e352

actively minimize such he alth care disparities.1-17Simi-
larly, efforts should be made to broaden clinical trials torepresent the diverse populations that we treat; studydesign, methodology, reporting, and implementationshould be designed to be more inclusive.
18,19
12.5. Quality of Life in Patients With Aortic Disease
Baseline HRQOL assessment in patients with aortic dis-
ease is lacking, and the few s tudies that have targeted
HRQOL have been conducted only in patients receivingendovascular or open aortic repair. The impact of phys-ical, mental, emotional, sexual, and professional status onthe psychosocial well-being, tolerance of medical thera-pies, and recovery from aort ic intervention has not been
well studied. The long-term effects on physical and
mental HRQOL after aortic repair are unknown. In addi-tion, evidence-based knowledge on studies targetingquality of life in patients with heritable TAA is narrow orlimited only to patients with Marfan syndrome; almost nostudies have been performed in patients with Loeys-Dietzsyndrome or vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, forexample. Furthermore, only scattered studies have
examined strategies for boost ing the psychological health
of patients with aortic disease and those undergoingaortic surgery. Aortic diseas es require a lifetime of treat-
m e n ta n ds u r v e i l l a n c e ,s or e s e a r c hi sn e e d e do nw a y st oimprove and sustain patient engagement, especiallyamong those who are disadvantaged or at a lowereducational level.
1-8
12.6. New Endovascular Technology
Advances in endovascular technology have dramati-
cally impacted treatment strategies in patients with
aortic disease requiring intervention. Despite this sig-niﬁcant progress, current en dovascular designs are
limited in their application because of the differinghemodynamic and anatomic challenges presented byeach segment of the aorta and individual differencesin aortic anatomy. In addition, operator knowledgeand experience, as well as methodical patient selec-
tion, are important for obtaining optimal outcomes
from endovascular procedures. Continued evolution instent-graft design, focused on ﬂexibility and durability,
improved vascular imaging technology, and advancesin simulation training for operators, will likely furtherreduce the risk of reinterventions and improve long-term outcomes.
1-6
12.7. Optimal Exercise and Rehabilitation Protocols
Very limited research has been conducted on optimal
exercise in patients with ao rtic disease. Moreover, no
speci ﬁc rehabilitation strategies exist for patients whostill have untreated diseased aortic segments after surgi-
cal aortic repair and who do not meet the surgicalthreshold for intervention. D eveloping patient-centric
rehabilitation protocols and individualized exercise pro-grams for patients with aortic disease is an unmet need
that requires further study.
1-4
12.8. Equitable Care and Training Opportunities
Sociodemographic disparities can pose challenges to pa-
tients and clinicians who seek and offer cardiovascular
and aortic care. Market competition, a relatively modernphenomenon, and physician market concentration candrive decision-making and subsequently affect optimalcare. Providing optimal cardi ovascular and aortic care will
depend on widespread regional quality improvementprojects to determine best pra ctices, minimize variations
in areas where evidence-based medicine has ﬁnite
benchmarks, and standardize patient selection and case
management. Physician participation in these programsshould be encouraged, and educational interventions andtraining should be provided to disseminate knowledgeand improve performance, which will help increaseawareness for patients and physicians in less-populated,underserved areas.
1-3
PRESIDENTS AND STAFF
American College of Cardiology
Edward T.A. Fry, MD, FACC, PresidentCathleen C. Gates, Chief Executive Of ﬁcer
Richard J. Kovacs, MD, MACC, Chief Medical AdviserMaryAnne Elma, MPH, Senior Director, Enterprise
Content and Digital Strategy
G r a c eD .R o n a n ,T e a mL e a d e r ,C linical Policy Publications
Leah Patterson, Project Manager, Clinical Content
Development
American College of Cardiology/American Heart AssociationThomas S.D. Getchius, Director, Guideline Strategy and
Operations
Abdul R. Abdullah, MD, Director, Guideline Science and
Methodology
American Heart Association
Donald M. Lloyd-Jones, MD, ScM, FAHA, PresidentNancy Brown, Chief Executive Of ﬁcer
Mariell Jessup, MD, FAHA, Chief Science and Medical
Ofﬁcer
R a d h i k aR a j g o p a lS i n g h ,P h D ,S e n i o rV i c eP r e s i d e n t ,
Ofﬁce of Science and Medicine
Johanna A. Sharp, MSN, RN, Science and Medicine
Advisor, Of ﬁce of Science, Medicine and Health
Jody Hundley, Production and Operations Manager,
Scienti ﬁcP u b l i c a t i o n s ,O f ﬁce of Science OperationsJACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee353

REFERENCES
PREAMBLE
1.Committee on Standards for Developing Trust-
worthy Clinical Practice Guidelines, Institute of Medi-cine (US). Clinical Practice Guidelines We Can Trust .
National Academies Press; 2011.
2.Committee on Standards for Systematic Reviews of
Comparative Effectiveness Research, Institute ofMedicine (US). Finding What Works in Health Care:
Standards for Systematic Reviews . National Academies
Press; 2011.
3.Anderson JL, Heidenreich PA, Barnett PG, et al.
ACC/AHA statement on cost/value methodology inclinical practice guidelines and performance measures:a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Perfor-mance Measures and Task Force on Practice Guide-lines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;63:2304 –2322.
4.ACCF/AHA Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Meth-
odology Manual and Policies from the ACCF/AHA Task
Force on Practice Guidelines . American College of
Cardiology and American Heart Association; 2010.Accessed September 23, 2019. https://www.acc.org/
Guidelines/About-Guidelines-and-Clinical-Documents/Methodology and https://professional.heart.
org/-/media/phd- ﬁles/guidelines-and-statements/
methodology_manual_and_policies_ucm_319826.pdf
5.Halperin JL, Levine GN, Al-Khatib SM, et al. Further
evolution of the ACC/AHA clinical practice guidelinerecommendation classi ﬁcation system: a report of the
American College of Cardiology/American Heart As-sociation Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2016;67:1572 –1574.
6.Arnett DK, Goodman RA, Halperin JL, et al. AHA/
ACC/HHS strategies to enhance application of clinical
practice guidelines in patients with cardiovascular
disease and comorbid conditions: from the AmericanHeart Association, American College of Cardiology,and U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;64:1851 –1856.
7.Levine GN, O ’Gara PT, Beckman JA, et al. Recent
innovations, modi ﬁcations, and evolution of ACC/AHA
clinical practice guidelines: an update for our constit-uencies: a report of the American College of Cardiol-
ogy/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical
Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;73:1990 –
1998.
1.4. Scope of the Guideline
1.Upchurch GR Jr, Escobar GA, Azizzdeh A, et al. So-
ciety for Vascular Surgery clinical practice guidelines ofthoracic endovascular aortic repair for descending
thoracic aortic aneurysms. J Vasc Surg . 2021;73:55S –
83S.
2.Otto CM, Nishimura RA, Bonow RO, et al. 2020 ACC/
AHA guideline for the management of patients withvalvular heart disease: a report of the American Col-lege of Cardiology/American Heart Association JointCommittee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2021;77:e25 –e197.
3.Hellmich B, Agueda A, Monti S, et al. 2018 update of
the EULAR recommendations for the management oflarge vessel vasculitis. Ann Rheum Dis . 2020;79:19 –30.4.Grundy SM, Stone NJ, Bailey AL, et al. 2018 AHA/
ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/ADA/AGS/APhA/ASPC/NLA/PCNA guideline on the management of bloodcholesterol: a report of the American College of Car-diology/American Heart Association Task Force onClinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;73:
e285 –e350.
5.Stout KK, Daniels CJ, Aboulhosn JA, et al. 2018
AHA/ACC guideline for the management of adults withcongenital heart disease: a report of the AmericanCollege of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task
Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines.
J Am Coll Cardiol .
2019;73:e81 –e192.
6.Chaikof EL, Dalman RL, Eskandari MK, et al. The
Society for Vascular Surgery practice guidelines on thecare of patients with an abdominal aortic aneurysm.J Vasc Surg . 2018;67:2 –77.e72.
7.Whelton PK, Carey RM, Aronow WS, et al. 2017 ACC/
AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/ASPC/NMA/PCNAguideline for the prevention, detection, evaluation, andmanagement of high blood pressure in adults: a reportof the American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J
Am Coll Cardiol . 2018;71:e127-e248.
8.Gerhard-Herman MD, Gornik HL, Barrett C, et al.
2016 AHA/ACC guideline on the management of pa-tients with lower extremity peripheral artery disease: a
report of the American College of Cardiology/Amer-
ican Heart Association Task Force on Clinical PracticeGuidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2017;69:e71 –e126.
9.Riambau V, Bockler D, Brunkwall J, et al. Editor ’s
choice –management of descending thoracic aorta
diseases: clinical practice guidelines of the European
Society for Vascular Surgery (ESVS). Eur J Vasc Endo-
vasc Surg . 2017;53:4 –52.
10.Hiratzka LF, Creager MA, Isselbacher EM, et al.
Surgery for aortic dilatation in patients with bicuspidaortic valves: a statement of clari ﬁcation from the
American College of Cardiology/American Heart As-
sociation Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines.J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2016;151:959 –966.
11.Wilson WR, Bower TC, Creager MA, et al. Vascular
graft infections, mycotic aneurysms, and endovascularinfections: a scienti ﬁc statement from the American
Heart Association. Circulation . 2016;134:e412 –e460.
12.Lee WA, Matsumura JS, Mitchell RS, et al. Endo-
vascular repair of traumatic thoracic aortic injury:clinical practice guidelines of the Society for VascularSurgery. J Vasc Surg . 2011;53:187 –192.
13.Hiratzka LF, Bakris GL, Beckman JA, et al. 2010
ACCF/AHA/AATS/ACR/ASA/SCA/SCAI/SIR/STS/SVM
guidelines for the diagnosis and management of pa-tients with thoracic aortic disease: a report of theAmerican College of Cardiology Foundation/AmericanHeart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines,American Association for Thoracic Surgery, AmericanCollege of Radiology, American Stroke Association,
Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists, Society
for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions,Society of Interventional Radiology, Society ofThoracic Surgeons, and Society for Vascular Medicine.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2010;55:e27 –e129.14.Smith SC Jr, Allen J, Blair SN, et al. AHA/ACC
guidelines for secondary prevention for patients withcoronary and other atherosclerotic vascular disease:2006 update. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2006;47:2130 –2139.
15.Malaisrie SC, Szeto WY, Halas M, et al. 2021 The
American Association for Thoracic Surgery expertconsensus document: surgical treatment of acute typeA aortic dissection. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2021;162:
735–758.e2.
16.MacGillivray TE, Gleason TG, Patel HJ, et al. The
Society of Thoracic Surgeons/American Association for
Thoracic Surgery clinical practice guidelines on themanagement of type B aortic dissection. Ann Thorac
Surg. 2022;113:1073 –1092.
2.2. Aortic Landing Zones
1.Czerny M, Schmidli J, Adler S, et al. Current options
and recommendations for the treatment of thoracicaortic pathologies involving the aortic arch: an expert
consensus document of the European Association for
Cardio-Thoracic surgery (EACTS) and the EuropeanSociety for Vascular Surgery (ESVS). Eur J Cardiothorac
Surg. 2019;55:133 –162.
2.Roselli EE, Idrees JJ, Johnston DR, et al. Zone zero
thoracic endovascular aortic repair: a proposed modi-ﬁcation to the classi ﬁcation of landing zones. J Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg . 2018;155:1381 –1389.
3.Johnston KW, Rutherford RB, Tilson MD, et al.
Suggested standards for reporting on arterial aneu-rysms. Subcommittee on Reporting Standards for
Arterial Aneurysms, Ad Hoc Committee on Reporting
Standards, Society for Vascular Surgery and NorthAmerican Chapter, International Society for Cardio-vascular Surgery. J Vasc Surg . 1991;13:452 –458.
4.Borger MA, Preston M, Ivanov J, et al. Should the
ascending aorta be replaced more frequently in pa-tients with bicuspid aortic valve disease? J Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg . 2004;128:677 –683.
5.Paruchuri V, Salhab KF, Kuzmik G, et al. Aortic size
distribution in the general population: explaining thesize paradox in aortic dissection. Cardiology . 2015;131:
265–272.
6.Erbel R, Aboyans V, Boileau C, et al. 2014 ESC
guidelines on the diagnosis and treatment of aortic
diseases: document covering acute and chronic aorticdiseases of the thoracic and abdominal aorta of theadult. The Task Force for the Diagnosis and Treatmentof Aortic Diseases of the European Society of Cardi-ology (ESC). Eur Heart J . 2014;35:2873 –2926.
7.Isselbacher EM. Thoracic and abdominal aortic an-
eurysms. Circulation . 2005;111:816 –828.
8.Kruger T, Sandoval Boburg R, Lescan M, et al. Aortic
elongation in aortic aneurysm and dissection: theTubingen Aortic Pathoanatomy (TAIPAN) project. Eur J
Cardiothorac Surg . 2018;54:26 –33.
9.Kawsara A, Nunez Gil IJ, Alqahtani F, et al. Man-
agement of coronary artery aneurysms. J Am Coll
Cardiol Intv . 2018;11:1211 –1223.
10.van Kimmenade RR, Kempers M, de Boer MJ,
et al. A clinical appraisal of different Z-scoreIsselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e354

equations for aortic root assessment in the diag-
nostic evaluation of Marfan syndrome. Genet Med .
2013;15:528 –532.
11.Davies RR, Gallo A, Coady MA, et al. Novel mea-
surement of relative aortic size predicts rupture ofthoracic aortic aneurysms. Ann Thorac Surg . 2006;81:
169–177.
12.Zafar MA, Li Y, Rizzo JA, et al. Height alone, rather
than body surface area, suf ﬁces for risk estimation in
ascending aortic aneurysm. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg .
2018;155:1938 –1950.
13.Svensson LG, Khitin L. Aortic cross-sectional area/
height ratio timing of aortic surgery in asymptomaticpatients with Marfan syndrome. J Thorac Cardiovasc
Surg. 2002;123:360 –361.
14.Masri A, Kalahasti V, Svensson LG, et al. Aortic
cross-sectional area/height ratio and outcomes in pa-tients with a trilea ﬂet aortic valve and a dilated aorta.
Circulation . 2016;134:1724 –1737.
15.Masri A, Kalahasti V, Svensson LG, et al. Aortic
cross-sectional area/height ratio and outcomes in pa-tients with bicuspid aortic valve and a dilatedascending aorta. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging . 2017;10:
e006249.
2.4. De ﬁnitions and Classi ﬁcation of Acute
Aortic Syndrome (AAS)
1.Clough RE, Nienaber CA. Management of acute
aortic syndrome. Nat Rev Cardiol . 2015;12:103 –114.
2.Booher AM, Isselbacher EM, Nienaber CA, et al. The
IRAD classi ﬁcation system for characterizing survival
after aortic dissection. Am J Med . 2013;126:730.e719 –
730.e724.
3.Tsai TT, Nienaber CA, Eagle KA. Acute aortic syn-
dromes. Circulation . 2005;112:3802 –3813.
4.Czerny M, Schmidli J, Adler S, et al. Current options
and recommendations for the treatment of thoracic
aortic pathologies involving the aortic arch: an expertconsensus document of the European Association forCardio-Thoracic surgery (EACTS) and the EuropeanSociety for Vascular Surgery (ESVS). Eur J Cardiothorac
Surg. 2019;55:133 –162.
5.Lombardi JV, Hughes GC, Appoo JJ, et al. Society for
Vascular Surgery (SVS) and Society of Thoracic Sur-geons (STS) reporting standards for type B aortic dis-sections. Ann Thorac Surg. 2020;109:959 –981.
6.Grewal S, Contrella BN, Sherk WM, et al. Endo-
vascular management of malperfusion syndromes inaortic dissection. Tech Vasc Interv Radiol . 2021;24:
100751.
7.Mussa FF, Horton JD, Moridzadeh R, et al. Acute
aortic dissection and intramural hematoma: a system-atic review. JAMA . 2016;316:754 –763.
8.Oderich GS, Kärkkäinen JM, Reed NR, et al. Pene-
trating aortic ulcer and intramural hematoma. Car-
diovasc Intervent Radiol . 2019;42:321 –334.
9.Harris KM, Braverman AC, Eagle KA, et al. Acute
aortic intramural hematoma: an analysis from the In-ternational Registry of Acute Aortic Dissection. Circu-
lation . 2012;126:S91 –S96.
10.Bossone E, LaBounty TM, Eagle KA. Acute aortic
syndromes: diagnosis and management, an update.Eur Heart J . 2018;39:739d –749d.
11.Song JK, Kim HS, Kang DH, et al. Different clinical
features of aortic intramural hematoma versusdissection involving the ascending aorta. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2001;37:1604 –1610.
12.Brown JA, Arnaoutakis GJ, Kilic A, et al. Current
trends in the management of acute type A aorticintramural hematoma. JC a r dS u r g . 2020;35:2331 –2337.
13.Bischoff MS, Geisbüsch P, Peters AS, et al. Pene-
trating aortic ulcer: de ﬁning risks and therapeutic
strategies. Herz . 2011;36:498 –504.
2.5. Classi ﬁcation of Thoracoabdominal Aortic
Aneurysm (TAAA)
1.SaﬁHJ, Winnerkvist A, Miller CC 3rd, et al. Effect of
extended cross-clamp time during thoracoabdominalaortic aneurysm repair. Ann Thorac Surg . 1998;66:
1204 –1209.
2.Riambau V, Bockler D, Brunkwall J, et al. Editor ’s
choice –management of descending thoracic aorta
diseases: clinical practice guidelines of the EuropeanSociety for Vascular Surgery (ESVS). Eur J Vasc Endo-
vasc Surg . 2017;53:4 –52.
3.Conrad MF, Cambria RP. Contemporary manage-
ment of descending thoracic and thoracoabdominalaortic aneurysms: endovascular versus open. Circula-
tion. 2008;117:841 –852.
3.1. Aortic Imaging Techniques to Determine
Presence and Progression of Aortic Disease
1.Sternbergh WC 3rd, Greenberg RK, Chuter TA, et al.
Redeﬁning postoperative surveillance after endovas-
cular aneurysm repair: recommendations based on 5-year follow-up in the US Zenith multicenter trial.J Vasc Surg . 2008;48:278 –284; discussion 84-85.
2.Rokosh RS, Wu WW, Schermerhorn M, et al. Society
for Vascular Surgery implementation of clinical practice
guidelines for patients with an abdominal aortic aneu-rysm: Postoperative surveillance after abdominal aorticaneurysm repair. J Vasc Surg . 2021;74:1438 –1439.
3.Mendoza DD, Kochar M, Devereux RB, et al. Impact
of image analysis methodology on diagnostic and
surgical classi ﬁcation of patients with thoracic aortic
aneurysms. Ann Thorac Surg . 2011;92:904 –912.
4.Rudarakanchana N, Bicknell CD, Cheshire NJ, et al.
Variation in maximum diameter measurements of
descending thoracic aortic aneurysms using unfor-matted planes versus images corrected to aorticcenterline. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg . 2014;47:19 –26.
5.Amis ES Jr, Butler PF, American College of Radi-
ology. ACR white paper on radiation dose in medicine:
three years later. J Am Coll Radiol . 2010;7:865 –870.
6.Brenner DJ, Hall EJ. Computed tomography –an
increasing source of radiation exposure. N Engl J Med .
2007;357:2277 –2284.
7.Costello JE, Cecava ND, Tucker JE, et al. CT radia-
tion dose: current controversies and dose reductionstrategies. AJR Am J Roentgenol . 2013;201:1283 –1290.
8.Svensson LG, Kim KH, Lytle BW, et al. Relation-
ship of aortic cross-sectional area to height ratio andthe risk of aortic dissection in patients with bicuspidaortic valves. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2003;126:
892 –893.
9.Masri A, Kalahasti V, Svensson LG, et al. Aortic
cross-sectional area/height ratio and outcomes in pa-tients with a trilea ﬂet aortic valve and a dilated aorta.
Circulation . 2016;134:1724 –1737.
10.Masri A, Kalahasti V, Svensson LG, et al. Aortic
cross-sectional area/height ratio and outcomes inpatients with bicuspid aortic valve and a dilated
ascending aorta. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging . 2017;10:
e006249.
11.Zafar MA, Li Y, Rizzo JA, et al. Height alone, rather
than body surface area, suf ﬁces for risk estimation in
ascending aortic aneurysm. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg .
2018;155:1938 –1950.
12.Beebe HG, Kritpracha B, Serres S, et al. Endograft
planning without preoperative arteriography: a clinicalfeasibility study. J Endovasc Ther . 2000;7:8 –15.
13.Vriz O, Driussi C, Bettio M, et al. Aortic root di-
mensions and stiffness in healthy subjects. Am J Car-
diol. 2013;112:1224
–1229.
14.Rodríguez-Palomares JF, Teixidó-Tura G,
Galuppo V, et al. Multimodality assessment ofascending aortic diameters: comparison of differentmeasurement methods. J Am Soc Echocardiogr .
2016;29:819 –826.e814.
15.Asch FM, Yuriditsky E, Prakash SK, et al. The need
for standardized methods for measuring the aorta:multimodality core lab experience from the GenTACRegistry. J Am Coll Cardiol Img . 2016;9:219 –226.
16.Potthast S, Mitsumori L, Stanescu LA, et al.
Measuring aortic diameter with different MR tech-niques: comparison of three-dimensional (3D) navi-gated steady-state free-precession (SSFP), 3D
contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance angiography
(CE-MRA), 2D T2 black blood, and 2D cine SSFP.J Magn Reson Imaging . 2010;31:177 –184.
17.Plonek T, Berezowski M, Bochenek M, et al.
A comparison of aortic root measurements by echo-cardiography and computed tomography. J Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg . 2019;157:479 –486.
18.Vasan RS, Larson MG, Benjamin EJ, et al. Echo-
cardiographic reference values for aortic root size: the
Framingham Heart Study. J Am Soc Echocardiogr .
1995;8:793 –800.
19.Vasan RS, Larson MG, Levy D. Determinants of
echocardiographic aortic root size. The FraminghamHeart Study. Circulation . 1995;91:734 –740.
20.Devereux RB, de Simone G, Arnett DK, et al.
Normal limits in relation to age, body size and genderof two-dimensional echocardiographic aortic root di-mensions in persons $15 years of age. Am J Cardiol .
2012;110:1189 –1194.
21.Borger MA, Fedak PWM, Stephens EH, et al. The
American Association for Thoracic Surgery consensus
guidelines on bicuspid aortic valve-related aortopathy:full online-only version. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg .
2018;156:e41 –e74.
3.2. Conventions of Measurements
1.Lombardi JV, Hughes GC, Appoo JJ, et al. Society for
Vascular Surgery (SVS) and Society of Thoracic Sur-
geons (STS) reporting standards for type B aortic dis-
sections. J Vasc Surg . 2020;71:723 –747.
2.Vasan RS, Larson MG, Levy D. Determinants of
echocardiographic aortic root size. The FraminghamHeart Study. Circulation . 1995;91:734 –740.
3.Vasan RS, Larson MG, Benjamin EJ, et al. Echocar-
diographic reference values for aortic root size: theFramingham Heart Study. J Am Soc Echocardiogr .
1995;8:793 –800.
4.Devereux RB, de Simone G, Arnett DK, et al. Normal
limits in relation to age, body size and gender of two-dimensional echocardiographic aortic root dimensionsJACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee355

in persons $15 years of age. Am J Cardiol . 2012;110:
1189 –1194.
5.Vriz O, Driussi C, Bettio M, et al. Aortic root di-
mensions and stiffness in healthy subjects. Am J Car-
diol. 2013;112:1224 –1229.
6.Rodríguez-Palomares JF, Teixidó-Tura G,
Galuppo V, et al. Multimodality Assessment of
ascending aortic diameters: comparison of different
measurement methods. J Am Soc Echocardiogr .
2016;29:819 –826.e814.
7.Weinrich JM, Avanesov M, Lenz A, et al. Reliability
of non-contrast magnetic resonance angiography-derived aortic diameters in Marfan patients: compari-son of inner vs. outer vessel wall measurements. Int J
Cardiovasc Imaging . 2020;36:1533 –1542.
8.Davies RR, Goldstein LJ, Coady MA, et al. Yearly
rupture or dissection rates for thoracic aortic aneu-
rysms: simple prediction based on size. Ann Thorac
Surg. 2002;73:17 –27; discussion 27-28.
9.Kim EK, Choi SH, Sung K, et al. Aortic diameter
predicts acute type A aortic dissection in patients withMarfan syndrome but not in patients without Marfansyndrome. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2014;147:1505 –
1510.
10.Masri A, Kalahasti V, Svensson LG, et al. Aortic
cross-sectional area/height ratio and outcomes in pa-tients with a trilea ﬂet aortic valve and a dilated aorta.
Circulation . 2016;134:1724 –1737.
11.Masri A, Kalahasti V, Svensson LG, et al. Aortic
cross-sectional area/height ratio and outcomes in pa-tients with bicuspid aortic valve and a dilatedascending aorta. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging . 2017;10:
e006249.
12.Bons LR, Rueda-Ochoa OL, El Ghoul K, et al. Sex-
speciﬁc distributions and determinants of thoracic
aortic diameters in the elderly. Heart . 2020;106:133 –
139.
13.Wu J, Zafar MA, Li Y, et al. Ascending aortic length
and risk of aortic adverse events: the neglected
dimension. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;74:1883 –1894.
14.Renapurkar RD, Setser RM, O ’Donnell TP, et al.
Aortic volume as an indicator of disease progression inpatients with untreated infrarenal abdominal aneu-rysm. Eur J Radiol . 2012;81:e87 –e93.
15.den Hartog AW, Franken R, de Witte P, et al. Aortic
disease in patients with Marfan syndrome: aortic vol-ume assessment for surveillance. Radiology . 2013;269:
370–377.
3.2.1. Computed Tomography
1.Lu TL, Huber CH, Rizzo E, et al. Ascending aorta
measurements as assessed by ECG-gated multi-de-tector computed tomography: a pilot study to estab-lish normative values for transcatheter therapies. Eur
Radiol . 2009;19:664 –669.
2.Davenport MS, Perazella MA, Yee J, et al. Use
of Intravenous Iodinated Contrast Media in Pa-tients With Kidney Disease: Consensus Statementsfrom the American College of Radiology and theNational Kidney Foundation. Kidney Med .2 0 2 0 ; 2 :
85–93.
3.Yoshida S, Akiba H, Tamakawa M, et al. Thoracic
involvement of type A aortic dissection and intramuralhematoma: diagnostic accuracy –comparison of emer-
gency helical CT and surgical ﬁndings. Radiology .
2003;228:430 –435.4.Imoto K, Uchida K, Karube N, et al. Risk analysis and
improvement of strategies in patients who have acutetype A aortic dissection with coronary artery dissec-tion. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg . 2013;44:419 –424; dis-
cussion 424-425.
5.Thoongsuwan N, Stern EJ. Chest CT scanning for
clinical suspected thoracic aortic dissection: beware
the alternate diagnosis. Emerg Radiol . 2002;9:257 –
261.
3.2.2. Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)
1.Barra L, Kanji T, Malette J, et al. Imaging modalities
for the diagnosis and disease activity assessment ofTakayasu ’s arteritis: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Autoimmun Rev . 2018;17:175 –187.
2.Potthast S, Mitsumori L, Stanescu LA, et al.
Measuring aortic diameter with different MR tech-
niques: comparison of three-dimensional (3D) navi-gated steady-state free-precession (SSFP), 3Dcontrast-enhanced magnetic resonance angiography(CE-MRA), 2D T2 black blood, and 2D cine SSFP.J Magn Reson Imaging . 2010;31:177 –184.
3.Krishnam MS, Tomasian A, Malik S, et al. Image
quality and diagnostic accuracy of unenhanced SSFP
MR angiography compared with conventional
contrast-enhanced MR angiography for the assess-ment of thoracic aortic diseases. Eur Radiol . 2010;20:
1311 –1320.
4.Moore AG, Eagle KA, Bruckman D, et al. Choice of
computed tomography, transesophageal echocardi-ography, magnetic resonance imaging, and aortog-raphy in acute aortic dissection: International Registry
of Acute Aortic Dissection (IRAD). Am J Cardiol .
2002;89:1235 –1238.
5.Lunyera J, Mohottige D, Alexopoulos AS, et al. Risk
for nephrogenic systemic ﬁbrosis after exposure to
newer gadolinium agents: a systematic review. Ann
Intern Med . 2020;173:110 –119.
6.Weinreb JC, Rodby RA, Yee J, et al. Use of intra-
venous gadolinium-based contrast media in patientswith kidney disease: consensus statements from the
American College of Radiology and the National Kid-
ney Foundation. Radiology . 2021;298:28 –
35.
3.2.3. Echocardiography
1.Evangelista A, Flachskampf FA, Erbel R, et al.
Echocardiography in aortic diseases: EAE recommen-dations for clinical practice. Eur J Echocardiogr .
2010;11:645 –658.
2.Goldstein SA, Evangelista A, Abbara S, et al. Multi-
modality imaging of diseases of the thoracic aorta in
adults: from the American Society of Echocardiogra-
phy and the European Association of CardiovascularImaging. J Am Soc Echocardiogr . 2015;28:119 –182.
3.2.4. Intravascular Ultrasound
1.Kpodonu J, Ramaiah VG, Diethrich EB. Intravascular
ultrasound imaging as applied to the aorta: a new toolfor the cardiovascular surgeon. Ann Thorac Surg .
2008;86:1391 –1398.
2.Martin ZL, Mastracci TM. The evaluation of aortic
dissections with intravascular ultrasonography. Vasc
Dis Manag . 2011;8:E93 –E97.
3.Lortz J, Tsagakis K, Rammos C, et al. Intravascular
ultrasound assisted sizing in thoracic endovascularaortic repair improves aortic remodeling in type Baortic dissection. PLoS One . 2018;13:e0196180.4.Lortz J, Papathanasiou M, Rammos C, et al. High
intimal ﬂap mobility assessed by intravascular ultra-
sound is associated with better short-term results af-ter TEVAR in chronic aortic dissection. Sci Rep . 2019;9:
7267.
5.Illuminati G, Pacilè MA, Ceccanei G, et al. Peroper-
ative intravascular ultrasound for endovascular aneu-
rysm repair versus peroperative angiography: a pilotstudy in ﬁt patients with favorable anatomy. Ann Vasc
Surg. 2020;64:54 –61.
3.2.5. Abdominal Ultrasound
1.Harter LP, Gross BH, Callen PW, et al. Ultrasonic
evaluation of abdominal aortic thrombus. J Ultrasound
Med. 1982;1:315 –318.
2.Steiner E, Rubens D, Weiss SL, et al. Sonographic
examination of the abdominal aorta through the left
ﬂank: a prospective study. J Ultrasound Med . 1986;5:
499 –502.
3.Owens DK, Davidson KW, Krist AH, et al. Screening
for abdominal aortic aneurysm: US Preventive ServicesTask Force recommendation statement. JAMA .
2019;322:2211 –2218.
4.Ellis M, Powell JT, Greenhalgh RM. Limitations of
ultrasonography in surveillance of small abdominal
aortic aneurysms. Br J Surg . 1991;78:614 –616.
5.Hirsch AT, Haskal ZJ, Hertzer NR, et al. ACC/AHA
2005 guidelines for the management of patients with
peripheral arterial disease (lower extremity, renal,mesenteric, and abdominal aortic): a collaborativereport from the American Association for VascularSurgery/Society for Vascular Surgery, Society for Car-diovascular Angiography and Interventions, Society for
Vascular Medicine and Biology, Society of Interven-
tional Radiology, and the ACC/AHA Task Force on
Practice Guidelines (Writing Committee to DevelopGuidelines for the Management of Patients with Pe-ripheral Arterial Disease). J Am Coll Cardiol . 2006;47:
e1–e192.
6.The UK Small Aneurysm Trial Participants. Mortality
results for randomised controlled trial of early elective
surgery or ultrasonographic surveillance for small
abdominal aortic aneurysms. Lancet . 1998;352:1649 –
1655.
7.Wilmink AB, Forshaw M, Quick CR, et al. Accuracy of
serial screening for abdominal aortic aneurysms byultrasound. J Med Screen . 2002;9:125 –127.
8.Long A, Rouet L, Lindholt JS, et al. Measuring the
maximum diameter of native abdominal aortic aneu-rysms: review and critical analysis. Eur J Vasc Endovasc
Surg. 2012;43:515 –524.
9.Abraha I, Luchetta ML, De Florio R, et al. Ultraso-
nography for endoleak detection after endoluminal
abdominal aortic aneurysm repair. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev . 2017;6:CD010296.
4. MULTIDISCIPLINARY AORTIC
TEAMS
1.Andersen ND, Ganapathi AM, Hanna JM, et al. Out-
comes of acute type A dissection repair before and
after implementation of a multidisciplinary thoracic
aortic surgery program. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;63:
1796 –1803.
2.Bottle A, Mariscalco G, Shaw MA, et al. Unwarranted
variation in the quality of care for patients withIsselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e356

diseases of the thoracic aorta. J Am Heart Assoc .
2017;6:e004913.
3.Landon BE, O ’Malley AJ, Giles K, et al. Volume-
outcome relationships and abdominal aortic aneurysmrepair. Circulation . 2010;122:1290 –1297.
4.Hughes GC, Zhao Y, Rankin JS, et al. Effects of
institutional volumes on operative outcomes for aortic
root replacement in North America. J Thorac Car-
diovasc Surg . 2013;145:166 –170.
5.Khan H, Hussain A, Chaubey S, et al. Acute aortic
dissection type A: impact of aortic specialists on shortand long term outcomes. J Card Surg . 2021;36:952 –
958.
6.Preventza O. In type A aortic dissection repair, an
effective team approach and relational coordinationare more important for patients ’outcomes than sur-
geon volume. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2017;154:407 –
408.
7.Elrod JK, Fortenberry JL Jr. Centers of excel-
lence in healthcare institutions: what they are and
how to assemble them. BMC Health Serv Res .
2017;17:425.
8.Otto CM, Nishimura RA, Bonow RO, et al. 2020
ACC/AHA guideline for the management of patientswith valvular heart disease: a report of the AmericanCollege of Cardiology/American Heart AssociationJoint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2021;77:e25 –e197.
9.Mori M, Shioda K, Wang X, et al. Perioperative risk
proﬁles and volume-outcome relationships in proximal
thoracic aortic surgery. Ann Thorac Surg . 2018;106:
1095 –1104.
10.Umana-Pizano JB, Nissen AP, Sandhu HK, et al.
Acute type A dissection repair by high-volume vs low-volume surgeons at a high-volume aortic center. Ann
Thorac Surg . 2019;108:1330 –1336.
5. Shared Decision-Making
1.Ubbink DT, Knops AM, Molenaar S, et al. Design and
development of a decision aid to enhance shared de-cision making by patients with an asymptomaticabdominal aortic aneurysm. Patient Prefer Adherence .
2008;2:315 –322.
2.Hess EP, Coylewright M, Frosch DL, et al. Imple-
mentation of shared decision making in cardiovascularcare: past, present, and future. Circ Cardiovasc Qual
Outcomes . 2014;7:797 –803.
3.Lin GA, Fagerlin A. Shared decision making: state of
the science. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes . 2014;7:
328–334.
4.Treasure T, King A, Hidalgo Lemp L, et al. Devel-
oping a shared decision support framework for aortic
root surgery in Marfan syndrome. Heart . 2018;104:
480 –486.
5.Gökalp AL, Takkenberg JJM. Decision-making in
thoracic aortic aneurysm surgery-clinician and patientview. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2019;31:638 –642.
6.Swart M, McCarthy R. Shared decision making for
elective abdominal aortic aneurysm surgery. Clin Med
(Lond) . 2019;19:473 –477.
7.Alston CZ, Berger S, Brownlee G, et al. Shared
decision-making strategies for best care: patient deci-sion aids NAM Perspectives. Discussion paper . National
Academy of Medicine; 2014. Accessed September 23,
2019. https://doi.org/10.31478/201409f6.1 Thoracic Aortic Aneurysm (TAA) Cause
1.Hiratzka LF, Bakris GL, Beckman JA, et al. 2010
ACCF/AHA/AATS/ACR/ASA/SCA/SCAI/SIR/STS/SVMguidelines for the diagnosis and management of pa-tients with thoracic aortic disease: a report of theAmerican College of Cardiology Foundation/AmericanHeart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines,
American Association for Thoracic Surgery, American
College of Radiology, American Stroke Association,Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists, Societyfor Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions,Society of Interventional Radiology, Society ofThoracic Surgeons, and Society for Vascular Medicine.
J Am Coll Cardiol . 2010;55:e27 –e129.
2.Biaggi P, Matthews F, Braun J, et al. Gender, age,
and body surface area are the major determinants of
ascending aorta dimensions in subjects with appar-ently normal echocardiograms. J Am Soc Echocardiogr .
2009;22:720 –725.
3.Zafar MA, Li Y, Rizzo JA, et al. Height alone, rather
than body surface area, suf ﬁces for risk estimation in
ascending aortic aneurysm. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg .
2018;155:1938 –1950.
4.Obel LM, Diederichsen AC, Steffensen FH, et al.
Population-based risk factors for ascending, arch,
descending, and abdominal aortic dilations for 60-74-
year-old individuals. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2021;78:201 –
211.
5.Rouchaud A, Brandt MD, Rydberg AM, et al. Prev-
alence of intracranial aneurysms in patients with aorticaneurysms. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol . 2016;37:1664 –
1668.
6.Vapnik JS, Kim JB, Isselbacher EM, et al. Charac-
teristics and outcomes of ascending versus descending
thoracic aortic aneurysms. Am J Cardiol . 2016;117:
1683 –1690.
7.Pinard A, Jones GT, Milewicz DM. Genetics of
thoracic and abdominal aortic diseases. Circ Res .
2019;124:588 –606.
8.Thakker PD, Braverman AC. Cardiogenetics: ge-
netic testing in the diagnosis and management ofpatients with aortic disease. Heart . 2021;107:619 –
626.
9.Raunso J, Song RJ, Vasan RS, et al. Familial clus-
tering of aortic size, aneurysms, and dissections in the
community. Circulation . 2020;142:920 –928.
10.Verhagen JMA, Kempers M, Cozijnsen L, et al.
Expert consensus recommendations on the car-
diogenetic care for patients with thoracic aortic dis-ease and their ﬁrst-degree relatives. Int J Cardiol .
2018;258:243 –248.
11.Milewicz DM, Ostergaard JR, la-Kokko LM, et al. De
novo ACTA2 mutation causes a novel syndrome ofmultisystemic smooth muscle dysfunction. Am J Med
Genet A . 2010;152A:2437 –2443.
6.1.1. Sporadic and Degenerative TAA
1.Vapnik JS, Kim JB, Isselbacher EM, et al. Charac-
teristics and outcomes of ascending versus descendingthoracic aortic aneurysms. Am J Cardiol . 2016;117:
1683 –1690.
2.Upchurch GR Jr, Escobar GC, Azizzdeh A, et al. So-
ciety for Vascular Surgery clinical practice guidelines
for thoracic endovascular aneurysm repair (Tevar).
J Vasc Surg . 2021;73:55S –83S.6.1.2.1. HTAD: Genetic Testing and Screening of
Family Members for TAD
1.Biddinger A, Rocklin M, Coselli J, et al. Familial
thoracic aortic dilatations and dissections: a case
control study. J Vasc Surg . 1997;25:506 –511.
2.Coady MA, Davies RR, Roberts M, et al. Familial
patterns of thoracic aortic aneurysms. Arch Surg .
1999;134:361 –367.
3.Albornoz G, Coady MA, Roberts M, et al. Familial
thoracic aortic aneurysms and dissections —incidence,
modes of inheritance, and phenotypic patterns. Ann
Thorac Surg . 2006;82:1400 –1405.
4.Renard M, Francis C, Ghosh R, et al. Clinical
validity of genes for heritable thoracic aorticaneurysm and dissection. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2018;72:605 –615.
5.Wolford BN, Hornsby WE, Guo D, et al. Clinical im-
plications of identifying pathogenic variants in in-
dividuals with thoracic aortic dissection. Circ Genom
Precis Med . 2019;12:e002476.
6.Milewicz DM, Guo D, Hostetler E, et al. Update on
the genetic risk for thoracic aortic aneurysms andacute aortic dissections: implications for clinical care.J Cardiovasc Surg (Torino) . 2021;62:203 –210.
7.Wallace SE, Regalado ES, Gong L, et al. MYLK
pathogenic variants aortic disease presentation, preg-nancy risk, and characterization of pathogenic
missense variants. Genet Med . 2019;21:144 –151.
8.Regalado ES, Guo DC, Prakash S, et al. Aortic dis-
ease presentation and outcome associated with ACTA2mutations. Circ Cardiovasc Genet . 2015;8:457 –464.
9.Guo DC, Regalado E, Casteel DE, et al. Recurrent
gain-of-function mutation in PRKG1 causes thoracicaortic aneurysms and acute aortic dissections. Am J
Hum Genet . 2013;93:398 –404.
10.Harris SL, Lindsay ME. Role of clinical genetic
testing in the management of aortopathies. Curr Car-
diol Rep . 2021;23:10.
11.Demo E, Rigelsky C, Rideout AL, et al. Genetics and
precision medicine: heritable thoracic aortic disease.
Med Clin North Am . 2019;103:1005 –1019.
12.Regalado ES, Guo DC, Villamizar C, et al. Exome
sequencing identi ﬁes SMAD3 mutations as a cause of
familial thoracic aortic aneurysm and dissection withintracranial and other arterial aneurysms. Circ Res .
2011;109:680 –686.
13.Robertson EN, van der Linde D, Sherrah AG, et al.
Familial non-syndromal thoracic aortic aneurysms anddissections —incidence and family screening outcomes.
Int J Cardiol . 2016;220:43 –51.
14.Hannuksela M, Stattin EL, Johansson B, et al.
Screening for familial thoracic aortic aneurysmswith aortic imaging does not detect all potentialcarriers of the disease. Aorta (Stamford) .2 0 1 5 ; 3 : 1 –
8.
15.Mariscalco G, Debiec R, Elefteriades JA, et al.
Systematic review of studies that have evaluatedscreening tests in relatives of patients affected bynonsyndromic thoracic aortic disease. J Am Heart
Assoc . 2018;7:e009302.
16.Guo DC, Pannu H, Papke CL, et al. Mutations in
smooth muscle alpha-actin ( ACTA2 ) lead to thoracic
aortic aneurysms and dissections. Nat Genet . 2007;39:
1488 –1493.JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee357

17.Rylski B, Blanke P, Beyersdorf F, et al. How does
the ascending aorta geometry change when it dis-sects? J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;63:1311 –1319.
18.Milewicz DM, Chen H, Park ES, et al. Reduced
penetrance and variable expressivity of familialthoracic aortic aneurysms/dissections. Am J Cardiol .
1998;82:474 –479.
19.Renard M, Francis C, Ghosh R, et al. Clinical validity
of genes for heritable thoracic aortic aneurysm and
dissection. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2018;72:605 –615.
20.Guo DC, Hostetler EM, Fan Y, et al. Heritable
thoracic aortic disease genes in sporadic aorticdissection. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2017;70:2728 –2730.
21.Boileau C, Guo DC, Hanna N, et al. TGFB2 muta-
tions cause familial thoracic aortic aneurysms and
dissections associated with mild systemic features ofMarfan syndrome. Nat Genet . 2012;44:916 –921.
22.Tran-Fadulu V, Pannu H, Kim DH, et al. Analysis of
multigenerational families with thoracic aortic aneu-
rysms and dissections due to TGFBR1 or TGFBR2 mu-
tations. J Med Genet . 2009;46:607 –613.
23.Villamizar C, Regalado ES, Fadulu VT, et al. Paucity
of skeletal manifestations in hispanic families withFBN1 mutations. Eur J Med Genet . 2010;53:80 –84.
24.Morisaki H, Akutsu K, Ogino H, et al. Mutation of
ACTA2 gene as an important cause of familial andnonfamilial nonsyndromatic thoracic aortic aneurysmand/or dissection (TAAD). Hum Mutat . 2009;30:1406 –
1411.
25.Guo DC, Papke CL, Tran-Fadulu V, et al. Mutations
in smooth muscle alpha-actin (ACTA2) cause coronaryartery disease, stroke, and moyamoya disease, alongwith thoracic aortic disease. Am J Hum Genet .
2009;84:617 –627.
26.Loscalzo ML, Goh DL, Loeys B, et al. Familial
thoracic aortic dilation and bicommissural aortic
valve: a prospective analysis of natural history andinheritance. Am J Med Genet A . 2007;143:1960 –
1967.
27.Zhu L, Vranckx R, Khau Van KP, et al. Mutations in
myosin heavy chain 11 cause a syndrome associating
thoracic aortic aneurysm/aortic dissection and patentductus arteriosus. Nat Genet . 2006;38:343 –349.
6.1.2.1.1. Surgical Considerations for Non-
syndromic Heritable TAAs and No Identi ﬁed
Genetic Cause
1.Weinsaft JW, Devereux RB, Preiss LR, et al. Aortic
Dissection in Patients With Genetically Mediated An-eurysms: Incidence and Predictors in the GenTACRegistry. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2016;67:2744 –2754.
2.Albornoz G, Coady MA, Roberts M, et al. Familial
thoracic aortic aneurysms and dissections –
incidence,
modes of inheritance, and phenotypic patterns. Ann
Thorac Surg . 2006;82:1400 –1405.
3.Robertson EN, van der Linde D, Sherrah AG, et al.
Familial non-syndromal thoracic aortic aneurysms anddissections - Incidence and family screening outcomes.
Int J Cardiol . 2016;220:43 –51.
4.Brownstein AJ, Kostiuk V, Ziganshin BA, et al. Genes
associated with thoracic aortic aneurysm and dissec-tion: 2018 update and clinical implications. Aorta
(Stamford) . 2018;6:13 –20.
5.Robertson EN, van der Linde D, Sherrah AG, et al.
Familial non-syndromal thoracic aortic aneurysms anddissections —incidence and family screening outcomes.
Int J Cardiol . 2016;220:43 –51.
6.Weinsaft JW, Devereux RB, Preiss LR, et al.
Aortic dissection in patients with genetically
mediated aneurysms: incidence and predictors inthe GenTAC registry. J Am Coll Cardiol .2 0 1 6 ; 6 7 :
2744 –2754.
7.Albornoz G, Coady MA, Roberts M, et al. Familial
thoracic aortic aneurysms and dissections —incidence,
modes of inheritance, and phenotypic patterns. Ann
Thorac Surg . 2006;82:1400 –1405.
8.Saeyeldin A, Zafar MA, Li Y, et al. Decision-making
algorithm for ascending aortic aneurysm: effectivenessin clinical application? J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg .
2019;157:1733 –1745.
6.1.2.2.1. Diagnostic and Surveillance Aortic
Imaging in Marfan Syndrome
1.Loeys BL, Dietz HC, Braverman AC, et al. The revised
Ghent nosology for the Marfan syndrome. J Med
Genet . 2010;47:476 –485.
2.Goldstein SA, Evangelista A, Abbara S, et al.
Multimodality imaging of diseases of the thoracicaorta in adults: from the American Society ofEchocardiography and the European Association ofCardiovascular Imaging. J Am Soc Echocardiogr .
2015;28:119 –182.
3.Finkbohner R, Johnston D, Crawford ES, et al.
Marfan syndrome. Long-term survival and complica-tions after aortic aneurysm repair. Circulation . 1995;91:
728–733.
4.den Hartog AW, Franken R, Zwinderman AH, et al.
The risk for type B aortic dissection in Marfan syn-
drome. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2015;65:246 –254.
5.Girdauskas E, Kuntze T, Borger MA, et al. Distal
aortic reinterventions after root surgery in Marfanpatients. Ann Thorac Surg . 2008;86:1815 –1819.
6.LeMaire SA, Carter SA, Volguina IV, et al. Spectrum
of aortic operations in 300 patients with con ﬁrmed or
suspected Marfan syndrome. Ann Thorac Surg .
2006;81:2063 –2078; discussion 2078.
7.Hagerty T, Geraghty P, Braverman AC. Abdominal
aortic aneurysm in Marfan syndrome. Ann Vasc Surg .
2017;40:294.e1 –294.e6.
8.Hiratzka LF, Bakris GL, Beckman JA, et al. 2010
ACCF/AHA/AATS/ACR/ASA/SCA/SCAI/SIR/STS/SVMguidelines for the diagnosis and management of pa-
tients with thoracic aortic disease: a report of the
American College of Cardiology Foundation/AmericanHeart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines,American Association for Thoracic Surgery, AmericanCollege of Radiology, American Stroke Association,Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists, Society
for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions,
Society of Interventional Radiology, Society ofThoracic Surgeons, and Society for Vascular Medicine.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2010;55:e27 –e129.
9.Gott VL, Greene PS, Alejo DE, et al. Replacement of
the aortic root in patients with Marfan ’s syndrome.
N Engl J Med . 1999;340:1307 –1313.
10.Silverman DI, Burton KJ, Gray J, et al. Life expec-
tancy in the Marfan syndrome. Am J Cardiol . 1995;75:
157–160.
11.Roman MJ, Rosen SE, Kramer-Fox R, et al. Prog-
nostic signi ﬁcance of the pattern of aortic root dilationin the Marfan syndrome. J Am Coll Cardiol . 1993;22:
1470 –1476.
12.Devereux RB, de Simone G, Arnett DK, et al.
Normal limits in relation to age, body size and genderof two-dimensional echocardiographic aortic root di-
mensions in persons $15 years of age. Am J Cardiol .
2012;110:1189 –1194.
13.LeMaire SA, Carter SA, Volguina IV, et al. Spectrum
of aortic operations in 300 patients with con ﬁrmed or
suspected Marfan syndrome. Ann Thorac Surg .
2006;81:2063 –2078. ; discussion 2078.
6.1.2.2.2. Medical Therapy in Marfan Syndrome
1.Forteza A, Evangelista A, Sánchez V, et al.
Efﬁcacy of losartan vs. atenolol for the preven-
tion of aortic dilation in Marfan syndrome: arandomized clinical trial. Eur Heart J .2 0 1 6 ; 3 7 :
978 –985.
2.Lacro RV, Dietz HC, Sleeper LA, et al. Atenolol
versus losartan in children and young adults withMarfan ’s syndrome. N Engl J Med . 2014;371:2061 –
2071.
3.
Groenink M, den Hartog AW, Franken R, et al. Los-
artan reduces aortic dilatation rate in adults withMarfan syndrome: a randomized controlled trial. Eur
Heart J . 2013;34:3491 –3500.
4.M u l l e nM ,J i nX Y ,C h i l dA ,e ta l .I r b e s a r t a ni n
Marfan syndrome (AIMS): a double-blind, placebo-c o n t r o l l e dr a n d o m i s e dt r i a l . Lancet .2 0 1 9 ; 3 9 4 :
2263 –2270.
5.Shores J, Berger KR, Murphy EA, et al. Progression
of aortic dilatation and the bene ﬁt of long-term beta-
adrenergic blockade in Marfan ’s syndrome. N Engl J
Med. 1994;330:1335 –1341.
6.Ladouceur M, Fermanian C, Lupoglazoff JM, et al.
Effect of beta-blockade on ascending aortic dilatationin children with the Marfan syndrome. Am J Cardiol .
2007;99:406 –409.
7.Hiratzka LF, Bakris GL, Beckman JA, et al. 2010
ACCF/AHA/AATS/ACR/ASA/SCA/SCAI/SIR/STS/SVM
guidelines for the diagnosis and management of pa-tients with thoracic aortic disease: a report of theAmerican College of Cardiology Foundation/AmericanHeart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines,American Association for Thoracic Surgery, American
College of Radiology, American Stroke Association,
Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists, Societyfor Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions,Society of Interventional Radiology, Society ofThoracic Surgeons, and Society for Vascular Medicine.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2010;55:e27 –e129.
8.Milleron O, Arnoult F, Ropers J, et al. Marfan Sartan:
a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.
Eur Heart J . 2015;36:2160 –2166.
9.Habashi JP, Judge DP, Holm TM, et al. Los-
artan, an AT1 antagonist, prevents aortic aneurysmin a mouse model of Marfan syndrome. Science .
2006;312:117 –121.
10.Brooke BS, Habashi JP, Judge DP, et al.
Angiotensin II blockade and aortic-root dilation inMarfan ’ss y n d r o m e . NE n g lJM e d . 2008;358:
2787 –2795.
11.Al-Abcha A, Saleh Y, Mujer M, et al. Meta-analysis
examining the usefulness of angiotensin receptorblockers for the prevention of aortic root dilation inIsselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e358

patients with the Marfan syndrome. Am J Cardiol .
2020;128:101 –106.
6.1.2.2.3. Marfan Syndrome Interventions:
Replacement of the Aortic Root in Patients With
Marfan Syndrome
1.Hiratzka LF, Bakris GL, Beckman JA, et al. 2010
ACCF/AHA/AATS/ACR/ASA/SCA/SCAI/SIR/STS/SVM
guidelines for the diagnosis and management of pa-tients with thoracic aortic disease: a report of theAmerican College of Cardiology Foundation/AmericanHeart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines,American Association for Thoracic Surgery, American
College of Radiology, American Stroke Association,
Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists, Societyfor Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions,Society of Interventional Radiology, Society ofThoracic Surgeons, and Society for Vascular Medicine.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2010;55:e27 –e129.
2.Erbel R, Aboyans V, Boileau C, et al. 2014 ESC
guidelines on the diagnosis and treatment of aortic
diseases: document covering acute and chronic aortic
diseases of the thoracic and abdominal aorta of theadult. The Task Force for the Diagnosis and Treatmentof Aortic Diseases of the European Society of Cardi-ology (ESC). Eur Heart J . 2014;35:2873 –2926.
3.Milleron O, Arnoult F, Delorme G, et al. Pathogenic
FBN1 genetic variation and aortic dissection in patientswith Marfan syndrome. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2020;75:
843 –853.
4.Martín C, Evangelista A, Serrano-Fiz S, et al. Aortic
complications in Marfan syndrome: should we antici-
pate preventive aortic root surgery? Ann Thorac Surg .
2020;109:1850 –1857.
5.Svensson LG, Khitin L. Aortic cross-sectional area/
height ratio timing of aortic surgery in asymptomaticpatients with Marfan syndrome. J Thorac Cardiovasc
Surg. 2002;123:360 –361.
6.Silverman DI, Gray J, Roman MJ, et al. Family his-
tory of severe cardiovascular disease in Marfan syn-drome is associated with increased aortic diameter and
decreased survival. J Am Coll Cardiol . 1995;26:1062 –
1067.
7.Finkbohner R, Johnston D, Crawford ES, et al.
Marfan syndrome. Long-term survival and complica-tions after aortic aneurysm repair. Circulation . 1995;91:
728–733.
8.Gott VL, Greene PS, Alejo DE, et al. Replacement of
the aortic root in patients with Marfan ’s syndrome.
N Engl J Med . 1999;340:1307 –1313.
9.Erbel R, Aboyans V, Boileau C, et al. 2014 ESC
guidelines on the diagnosis and treatment of aortic
diseases: document covering acute and chronic
aortic diseases of the thoracic and abdominal aortaof the adult. The Task Force for the Diagnosis andTreatment of Aortic Diseases of the European So-ciety of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J . 2014;35:
2873 –2926.
10.Silverman DI, Burton KJ, Gray J, et al. Life expec-
tancy in the Marfan syndrome. Am J Cardiol . 1995;75:
157–160.
11.Jondeau G, Detaint D, Tubach F, et al. Aortic event
rate in the Marfan population: a cohort study. Circu-
lation . 2012;125:226
–232.
12.Saeyeldin A, Zafar MA, Velasquez CA, et al. Natural
history of aortic root aneurysms in Marfan syndrome.
Ann Cardiothorac Surg . 2017;6:625 –632.13.Coselli JS, Volguina IV, LeMaire SA, et al. Early and
1-year outcomes of aortic root surgery in patients withMarfan syndrome: a prospective, multicenter,comparative study. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg .
2014;147:1758 –1766, 1767.e1-4.
14.Roman MJ, Rosen SE, Kramer-Fox R, et al. Prog-
nostic signi ﬁcance of the pattern of aortic root dilation
in the Marfan syndrome. J Am Coll Cardiol . 1993;22:
1470 –1476.
15.Morris SA, Orbach DB, Geva T, et al. Increased
vertebral artery tortuosity index is associated withadverse outcomes in children and young adults withconnective tissue disorders. Circulation . 2011;124:388 –
396.
6.1.2.2.4. Marfan Syndrome Interventions:
Replacement of Primary (Nondissected) Aneu-
rysms of the Aortic Arch, Descending, and
Abdominal Aorta in Patients With Marfan
Syndrome
1.den Hartog AW, Franken R, Zwinderman AH, et al.
The risk for type B aortic dissection in Marfan syn-drome. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2015;65:246 –254.
2.LeMaire SA, Carter SA, Volguina IV, et al. Spectrum
of aortic operations in 300 patients with con ﬁrmed or
suspected Marfan syndrome. Ann Thorac Surg .
2006;81:2063 –2078; discussion 2078.
3.Roselli EE, Idrees JJ, Lowry AM, et al. Beyond
the aortic root: staged open and endovascularrepair of arch and descending aorta in patientswith connective tissue disorders. Ann Thorac Surg .
2016;101:906 –912.
4.Schoenhoff FS, Yildiz M, Langhammer B, et al.
The fate of nonaortic arterial segments in Marfanpatients. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2019;157:2150 –
2156.
5.Engelfriet PM, Boersma E, Tijssen JG, et al. Beyond
the root: dilatation of the distal aorta in Marfan ’s
syndrome. Heart . 2006;92:1238 –1243.
6.Kim JB, Spotnitz M, Lindsay ME, et al. Risk of aortic
dissection in the moderately dilated ascending aorta.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2016;68:1209 –1219.
7.Braverman AC, Mittauer E, Harris KM, et al.
Clinical features and outcomes of pregnancy-relatedacute aortic dissection. JAMA Cardiol .2 0 2 1 ; 6 : 5 8 –
66.
6.1.2.3.1. Imaging in Loeys-Dietz Syndrome
1.Loeys BL, Schwarze U, Holm T, et al. Aneurysm
syndromes caused by mutations in the TGF-beta re-
ceptor.
N Engl J Med . 2006;355:788 –798.
2.MacCarrick G, Black JH 3rd, Bowdin S, et al. Loeys-
Dietz syndrome: a primer for diagnosis and manage-ment. Genet Med . 2014;16:576 –587.
3.Hiratzka LF, Bakris GL, Beckman JA, et al. 2010
ACCF/AHA/AATS/ACR/ASA/SCA/SCAI/SIR/STS/SVMguidelines for the diagnosis and management of pa-tients with thoracic aortic disease: a report of the
American College of Cardiology Foundation/American
Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines,American Association for Thoracic Surgery, AmericanCollege of Radiology, American Stroke Association,Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists, Societyfor Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions,
Society of Interventional Radiology, Society of
Thoracic Surgeons, and Society for Vascular Medicine.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2010;55:e27 –e129.4.van der Linde D, van de Laar IM, Bertoli-Avella AM,
et al. Aggressive cardiovascular phenotype ofaneurysms-osteoarthritis syndrome caused by patho-genic SMAD3 variants. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2012;60:397 –
403.
5.Bulder RMA, Eefting D, Vriens P, et al. Editor ’s
choice —a systemic evaluation of the costs of elective
EVAR and open abdominal aortic aneurysm repair im-plies cost equivalence. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg .
2020;60:655 –662.
6.Jondeau G, Ropers J, Regalado E, et al. Interna-
tional Registry of Patients Carrying TGFBR1 or TGFBR2Mutations: results of the MAC (Montalcino AorticConsortium). Circ Cardiovasc Genet . 2016;9:548 –558.
7.Kitagawa A, Greenberg RK, Eagleton MJ, et al.
Fenestrated and branched endovascular aortic repair
for chronic type B aortic dissection with thor-
acoabdominal aneurysms. J Vasc Surg . 2013;58:625 –
634.
8.Jondeau G, Ropers J, Regalado E, et al. Interna-
tional Registry of Patients Carrying TGFBR1 or TGFBR2Mutations: results of the MAC (Montalcino AorticConsortium). Circ Cardiovasc Genet . 2016;9:548 –558.
9.Hostetler EM, Regalado ES, Guo DC, et al. SMAD3
pathogenic variants: risk for thoracic aortic disease and
associated complications from the Montalcino Aortic
Consortium. J Med Genet . 2019;56:252 –260.
10.van de Laar IM, van der Linde D, Oei EH, et al.
Phenotypic spectrum of the SMAD3-relatedaneurysms-osteoarthritis syndrome. J Med Genet .
2012;49:47 –57.
11.Huguenard AL, Gupta VP, Braverman AC, et al.
Genetic and heritable considerations in patients orfamilies with both intracranial and extracranial aneu-rysms. J Neurosurg . 2021;134:1999 –2006.
12.van der LD, van dL I, Bertoli-Avella AM, et al.
Aggressive cardiovascular phenotype of aneurysms-osteoarthritis syndrome caused by pathogenicSMAD3 variants. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2012;60:397 –403.
13.Bertoli-Avella AM, Gillis E, Morisaki H, et al. Mu-
tations in a TGF-beta ligand, TGFB3, cause syndromic
aortic aneurysms and dissections. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2015;65:1324 –1336.
14.Boileau C, Guo DC, Hanna N, et al. TGFB2 muta-
tions cause familial thoracic aortic aneurysms anddissections associated with mild systemic features ofMarfan syndrome. Nat Genet . 2012;44:916 –921.
15.Lindsay ME, Schepers D, Bolar NA, et al. Loss-of-
function mutations in TGFB2 cause a syndromic pre-
sentation of thoracic aortic aneurysm. Nat Genet .
2012;44:922 –927.
16.Schepers D, Tortora G, Morisaki H, et al. A mutation
update on the LDS-associated genes TGFB2/3 andSMAD2/3. Hum Mutat . 2018;39:621 –634.
17.Thakker PD, Braverman AC. Cardiogenetics:
genetic testing in the diagnosis and management
of patients with aortic disease. Heart . 2021;107:
619–626.
18.Patel ND, Alejo D, Crawford T, et al. Aortic root
replacement for children with Loeys-Dietz syndrome.
Ann Thorac Surg . 2017;103:1513 –1518.
19.Schoenhoff FS, Alejo DE, Black JH, et al. Manage-
ment of the aortic arch in patients with Loeys-Dietzsyndrome. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2020;160:1166 –
1175.JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee359

20.Regalado ES, Guo DC, Villamizar C, et al. Exome
sequencing identi ﬁes SMAD3 mutations as a cause of
familial thoracic aortic aneurysm and dissection withintracranial and other arterial aneurysms. Circ Res .
2011;109:680 –686.
6.1.2.3.2. Medical Therapy in Loeys-Dietz
Syndrome
1.MacCarrick G, Black JH 3rd, Bowdin S, et al. Loeys-
Dietz syndrome: a primer for diagnosis and manage-
ment. Genet Med . 2014;16:576 –587.
2.Gallo EM, Loch DC, Habashi JP, et al. Angiotensin II-
dependent TGF-beta signaling contributes to Loeys-Dietz syndrome vascular pathogenesis. J Clin Invest .
2014;124:448 –460.
6.1.2.3.3. Loeys-Dietz Syndrome Surgical In-
terventions: Replacement of the Aorta in Pa-
tients With Loeys-Dietz Syndrome
1.Loeys BL, Schwarze U, Holm T, et al. Aneurysm
syndromes caused by mutations in the TGF-beta re-
ceptor. N Engl J Med . 2006;355:788 –798.
2.Jondeau G, Ropers J, Regalado E, et al. International
registry of patients carrying TGFBR1 or TGFBR2 mu-tations: results of the MAC (Montalcino Aortic Con-sortium). Circ Cardiovasc Genet . 2016;9:548 –558.
3.van der LD, van dL I, Bertoli-Avella AM, et al.
Aggressive cardiovascular phenotype of aneurysms-osteoarthritis syndrome caused by pathogenicSMAD3 variants. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2012;60:397 –
403.
4.Hostetler EM, Regalado ES, Guo DC, et al. SMAD3
pathogenic variants: risk for thoracic aortic disease andassociated complications from the Montalcino AorticConsortium. J Med Genet . 2019;56:252 –260.
5.Boileau C, Guo DC, Hanna N, et al. TGFB2 mutations
cause familial thoracic aortic aneurysms and dissec-tions associated with mild systemic features of Marfansyndrome. Nat Genet . 2012;44:916 –921.
6.Lindsay ME, Schepers D, Bolar NA, et al. Loss-of-
function mutations in TGFB2 cause a syndromic pre-
sentation of thoracic aortic aneurysm. Nat Genet .
2012;44:922 –927.
7.Renard M, Callewaert B, Baetens M, et al. Novel
MYH11 and ACTA2 mutations reveal a role forenhanced TGFß signaling in FTAAD. Int J Cardiol .
2013;165:314 –321.
8.Bertoli-Avella AM, Gillis E, Morisaki H, et al. Muta-
tions in a TGF-beta ligand, TGFB3, cause syndromic
aortic aneurysms and dissections. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2015;65:1324 –1336.
9.Marsili L, Overwater E, Hanna N, et al. Phenotypic
spectrum of TGFB3 disease-causing variants in a
Dutch-French cohort and ﬁrst report of a homozygous
patient.
Clin Genet . 2020;97:723 –730.
10.MacCarrick G, Black JH 3rd, Bowdin S, et al. Loeys-
Dietz syndrome: a primer for diagnosis and manage-ment. Genet Med . 2014;16:576 –587.
11.Patel ND, Crawford T, Magruder JT, et al. Cardio-
vascular operations for Loeys-Dietz syndrome:intermediate-term results. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg .
2017;153:406 –412.
12.Aftab M, Cikach FS, Zhu Y, et al. Loeys-Dietz syn-
drome: intermediate-term outcomes of medically andsurgically managed patients. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg .
2019;157:439 –450.e5.13.Hostetler EM, Regalado ES, Guo DC, et al. SMAD3
pathogenic variants: risk for thoracic aortic disease andassociated complications from the Montalcino AorticConsortium. J Med Genet . 2019;56:252 –260.
14.Renard M, Callewaert B, Malfait F, et al. Thoracic
aortic-aneurysm and dissection in association with
signiﬁcant mitral valve disease caused by mutations in
TGFB2. Int J Cardiol . 2013;165:584 –587.
15.van de Laar IM, Oldenburg RA, Pals G, et al. Mu-
tations in SMAD3 cause a syndromic form of aorticaneurysms and dissections with early-onset osteoar-thritis. Nat Genet . 2011;43:121 –126.
16.van der Linde D, van de Laar IM, Bertoli-Avella AM,
et al. Aggressive cardiovascular phenotype ofaneurysms-osteoarthritis syndrome caused by patho-genic SMAD3 variants. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2012;60:397 –
403.
17.Tran-Fadulu V, Pannu H, Kim DH, et al. Analysis of
multigenerational families with thoracic aortic aneu-rysms and dissections due to TGFBR1 or TGFBR2 mu-tations. J Med Genet . 2009;46:607 –613.
18.Schoenhoff FS, Alejo DE, Black JH, et al. Manage-
ment of the aortic arch in patients with Loeys-Dietzsyndrome. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2020;160:1166 –
1175.
19.Jondeau G, Ropers J, Regalado E, et al. Inter-
national Registry of Patients Carrying TGFBR1 or
TGFBR2 Mutations: results of the MAC (Montalcino
Aortic Consortium). Circ Cardiovasc Genet . 2016;9:
548 –558.
20.Hiratzka LF, Bakris GL, Beckman JA, et al. 2010
ACCF/AHA/AATS/ACR/ASA/SCA/SCAI/SIR/STS/SVMguidelines for the diagnosis and management of pa-tients with thoracic aortic disease: a report of theAmerican College of Cardiology Foundation/American
Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines,
American Association for Thoracic Surgery, AmericanCollege of Radiology, American Stroke Association,Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists, Societyfor Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions,Society of Interventional Radiology, Society of
Thoracic Surgeons, and Society for Vascular Medicine.
J Am Coll Cardiol . 2010;55:e27 –e129.
21.Singh KK, Rommel K, Mishra A, et al. TGFBR1 and
TGFBR2 mutations in patients with features of Marfansyndrome and Loeys-Dietz syndrome. Hum Mutat .
2006;27:770 –777.
22.Skeik N, Golden M, Berg A, et al. Type A aortic
dissection caused by Loeys-Dietz syndrome with novelvariation. Ann Vasc Surg . 2020;68:567.e1 –567.e4.
23.Bertoli-Avella AM, Gillis E, Morisaki H, et al. Mu-
tations in a TGF-beta ligand, TGFB3, cause syndromic
aortic aneurysms and dissections. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2015;65:1324 –1336.
6.1.2.4. Vascular Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome: Im-
aging, Medical Therapy, and SurgicalIntervention
1.Shalhub S, Byers PH, Hicks KL, et al. A multi-insti-
tutional experience in the aortic and arterial pathologyin individuals with genetically con ﬁrmed vascular
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. J Vasc Surg . 2019;70:1543 –
1554.
2.Shalhub S, Black JH 3rd, Cecchi AC, et al. Molecular
diagnosis in vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome predictspattern of arterial involvement and outcomes. J Vasc
Surg. 2014;60:160 –169.3.Benrashid E, Ohman JW. Current management of
the vascular subtype of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. Curr
Opin Cardiol . 2020;35:603 –609.
4.Erbel R, Aboyans V, Boileau C, et al. 2014 ESC
guidelines on the diagnosis and treatment of aorticdiseases: document covering acute and chronic aortic
diseases of the thoracic and abdominal aorta of the
adult. The Task Force for the Diagnosis and Treatmentof Aortic Diseases of the European Society of Cardi-ology (ESC). Eur Heart J . 2014;35:2873 –2926.
5.Brooke BS, Arnaoutakis G, McDonnell NB, et al.
Contemporary management of vascular complicationsassociated with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. J Vasc Surg .
2010;51:131 –138; discussion 138-139.
6.Sage L, Russo ML, Byers PH, et al. Setting a research
agenda for vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome using a
patient and stakeholder engagement model. J Vasc
Surg. 2020;72:1436 –1444.e2.
7.Ong KT, Perdu J, De Backer J, et al. Effect of cel-
iprolol on prevention of cardiovascular events invascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome: a prospective rand-omised, open, blinded-endpoints trial. Lancet .
2010;376:1476 –1484.
8.Frank M, Adham S, Seigle S, et al. Vascular Ehlers-
Danlos syndrome: long-term observational study.
J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;73:1948 –1957.
9.Murray ML, Pepin M, Peterson S, et al. Pregnancy-
related deaths and complications in women with
vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. Genet Med . 2014;16:
874–880.
10.Byers PH, Belmont J, Black J, et al. Diagnosis,
natural history, and management in vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med
Genet . 2017;175:40 –
47.
11.Campens L, Baris L, Scott NS, et al. Pregnancy
outcome in thoracic aortic disease data from theRegistry of Pregnancy and Cardiac Disease. Heart .
2021;107:1704 –1709.
12.Regitz-Zagrosek V, Roos-Hesselink JW,
Bauersachs J, et al. 2018 ESC guidelines for the man-agement of cardiovascular diseases during pregnancy.Eur Heart J . 2018;39:3165 –3241.
6.1.2.5. Turner Syndrome
1.Mazzanti L, Cacciari E. Congenital heart disease in
patients with Turner ’s syndrome. Italian Study Group
for Turner Syndrome (ISGTS). J Pediatr . 1998;133:688 –
692.
2.Sybert VP. Cardiovascular malformations and com-
plications in Turner syndrome. Pediatrics . 1998;101:
E11.
3.Volkl TM, Degenhardt K, Koch A, et al. Cardiovas-
cular anomalies in children and young adults withUllrich-Turner syndrome the Erlangen experience. Clin
Cardiol . 2005;28:88 –92.
4.Gotzsche CO, Krag-Olsen B, Nielsen J, et al. Prev-
alence of cardiovascular malformations and associa-
tion with karyotypes in Turner ’s syndrome. Arch Dis
Child . 1994;71:433 –436.
5.Mazzanti L, Prandstraller D, Tassinari D, et al. Heart
disease in Turner ’s syndrome. Helv Paediatr Acta .
1988;43:25 –31.
6.Kim HK, Gottliebson W, Hor K, et al. Cardiovascular
anomalies in Turner syndrome: spectrum, prevalence,
and cardiac MRI ﬁndings in a pediatric and young adult
population. AJR Am J Roentgenol . 2011;196:454 –460.Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e360

7.Ho VB, Bakalov VK, Cooley M, et al. Major vascular
anomalies in Turner syndrome - prevalence and mag-netic resonance angiographic features. Circulation .
2004;110:1694 –1700.
8.Loscalzo ML, Van PL, Ho VB, et al. Association be-
tween fetal lymphedema and congenital cardiovascu-
lar defects in Turner syndrome. Pediatrics . 2005;115:
732–735.
9.Silberbach M, Roos-Hesselink JW, Andersen NH,
et al. Cardiovascular health in Turner syndrome: ascienti ﬁc statement from the American Heart
Association. Circ Genom Precis Med . 2018;11:
e000048.
10.Matura LA, Ho VB, Rosing DR, et al. Aortic dilata-
tion and dissection in Turner syndrome. Circulation .
2007;116:1663 –1670.
11.Carlson M, Airhart N, Lopez L, et al. Moderate
aortic enlargement and bicuspid aortic valve are
associated with aortic dissection in Turner syn-drome: report of the international turner syndromeaortic dissection registry. Circulation .2 0 1 2 ; 1 2 6 :
2220 –2226.
12.Gravholt CH, Andersen NH, Conway GS, et al.
Clinical practice guidelines for the care of girls andwomen with Turner syndrome: proceedings from the
2016 Cincinnati International Turner Syndrome
Meeting. Eur J Endocrinol . 2017;177:G1 –G70.
13.Carlson M, Silberbach M. Dissection of the aorta in
Turner syndrome: two cases and review of 85 cases inthe literature. J Med Genet . 2007;44:745 –749.
14.Quezada E, Lapidus J, Shaughnessy R, et al. Aortic
dimensions in Turner syndrome. Am J Med Genet A .
2015;167A:2527 –2532.
6.1.2.6. Pathogenic or Likely Pathogenic Vari-
ants in ACTA2, PRKG1, MYH11, MYLK, and LOX:
Recommendations for Surveillance of Aorta,Medical Therapy, and Aortic Surgical
Intervention
1.Guo DC, Regalado ES, Gong L, et al. LOX Mutations
Predispose to Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms and Dissec-tions. Circ Res . 2016;118:928 –934.
2.Guo DC, Pannu H, Papke CL, et al. Mutations in
smooth muscle alpha-actin ( ACTA2 ) lead to thoracic
aortic aneurysms and dissections. Nat Genet . 2007;39:
1488 –1493.
3.Wang L, Guo DC, Cao J, et al. Mutations in Myosin
light chain kinase cause familial aortic dissections. Am
J Hum Genet . 2010;87:701 –707.
4.Pannu H, Tran-Fadulu V, Papke CL, et al. MYH11
mutations result in a distinct vascular pathology drivenby insulin-like growth factor 1 and angiotensin II. Hum
Mol Genet . 2007;16:3453 –3462.
5.Guo DC, Papke CL, Tran-Fadulu V, et al. Mutations in
smooth muscle alpha-actin (ACTA2) cause coronary
artery disease, stroke, and moyamoya disease, along
with thoracic aortic disease. Am J Hum Genet .
2009;84:617 –627.
6.Milewicz DM, Ostergaard JR, la-Kokko LM, et al. De
novo ACTA2 mutation causes a novel syndrome ofmultisystemic smooth muscle dysfunction. Am J Med
Genet A . 2010;152A:2437 –2443.
7.Regalado ES, Guo DC, Prakash S, et al. Aortic
disease presentation and outcome associated with
ACTA2 mutations. Circ Cardiovasc Genet . 2015;8:457 –
464.8.Lauer A, Speroni SL, Patel JB, et al. Cerebrovascular
disease progression in patients with ACTA2 Arg179pathogenic variants. Neurology . 2021;96:e538 –e552.
9.Regalado ES, Guo DC, Prakash S, et al. Aortic dis-
ease presentation and outcome associated with ACTA2mutations. Circ Cardiovasc Genet . 2015;8:457 –464.
10.Galian-Gay L, Carro Hevia A, Teixido-Tura G, et al.
Familial clustering of bicuspid aortic valve and its
relationship with aortic dilation in ﬁrst-degree rela-
tives. Heart . 2019;105:603 –608.
11.Guo DC, Regalado E, Casteel DE, et al. Recurrent
gain-of-function mutation in PRKG1 causes thoracicaortic aneurysms and acute aortic dissections. Am J
Hum Genet . 2013;93:398 –404.
12.Shalhub S, Regalado ES, Guo DC, et al. The natural
history of type B aortic dissection in patients withPRKG1 mutation c.530G >A (p.Arg177Gln). J Vasc Surg .
2019;70:718 –723.
13.Gago-Diaz M, Blanco-Verea A, Teixido G, et al.
PRKG1 and genetic diagnosis of early-onset thoracic
aortic disease. Eur J Clin Invest . 2016;46:787 –794.
14.Zhu L, Vranckx R, Khau Van KP, et al. Mutations in
myosin heavy chain 11 cause a syndrome associatingthoracic aortic aneurysm/aortic dissection and patentductus arteriosus. Nat Genet . 2006;38:343 –349.
15.Wallace SE, Regalado ES, Gong L, et al. MYLK
pathogenic variants aortic disease presentation, preg-nancy risk, and characterization of pathogenic
missense variants. Genet Med . 2019;21:144 –151.
16.Luyckx I, Proost D, Hendriks JM, et al. Two novel
MYLK nonsense mutations causing thoracic aortic an-
eurysms/dissections in patients without apparent
family history. Clin Genet . 2017;92:444 –446.
17.Lee VS, Halabi CM, Hoffman EP, et al. Loss of
function mutation in LOX causes thoracic aortic aneu-rysm and dissection in humans. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S
A. 2016;113:8759 –8764.
18.Cirnu A, Kolokotronis K, Walz K, et al. Novel mu-
tation in LOX associates with a complex aneurysmalvascular and cardiac phenotype. Circ Genom Precis
Med. 2021;14:e003217.
6.1.3. BAV Aortopathy
1.Kang JW, Song HG, Yang DH, et al. Association
between bicuspid aortic valve phenotype and pat-terns of valvular dysfunction and bicuspid aortop-athy: comprehensive evaluation using MDCT andechocardiography. J Am Coll Cardiol Img . 2013;6:
150–161.
2.Della Corte A, Bancone C, Buonocore M, et al.
Pattern of ascending aortic dimensions predicts thegrowth rate of the aorta in patients with bicuspidaortic valve. J Am Coll Cardiol Img . 2013;6:1301 –1310.
3.Masri A, Kalahasti V, Svensson LG, et al. Aortic
cross-sectional area/height ratio and outcomes in pa-tients with bicuspid aortic valve and a dilatedascending aorta. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging . 2017;10:
e006249.
4.Schaefer BM, Lewin MB, Stout KK, et al. The
bicuspid aortic valve: an integrated phenotypic classi-
ﬁcation of lea ﬂet morphology and aortic root shape.
Heart . 2008;94:1634 –1638.
5.Bravo-Jaimes K, Prakash SK. Genetics in bicuspid
aortic valve disease: where are we? Prog Cardiovasc
Dis. 2020;63:398 –406.6.Gillis E, Kumar AA, Luyckx I, et al. Candidate gene
resequencing in a large bicuspid aortic valve-associated thoracic aortic aneurysm cohort: SMAD6as an important contributor. Front Physiol . 2017;8:
400.
7.Loscalzo ML, Goh DL, Loeys B, et al. Familial
thoracic aortic dilation and bicommissural aortic valve:
a prospective analysis of natural history and inheri-tance. Am J Med Genet A . 2007;143:1960 –1967.
8.Galian-Gay L, Carro Hevia A, Teixido-Tura G, et al.
Familial clustering of bicuspid aortic valve and itsrelationship with aortic dilation in ﬁrst-degree rela-
tives. Heart . 2019;105:603 –608.
9.Kerstjens-Frederikse WS, Du Marchie Sarvaas GJ,
Ruiter JS, et al. Left ventricular out ﬂow tract
obstruction: should cardiac screening be offered to
ﬁrst-degree relatives? Heart . 2011;97:1228 –1232.
10.Cripe L, Andel ﬁnger G, Martin LJ, et al. Bicuspid
aortic valve is heritable.
J Am Coll Cardiol . 2004;44:
138–143.
11.Michelena HI, Khanna AD, Mahoney D, et al. Inci-
dence of aortic complications in patients with bicuspidaortic valves. JAMA . 2011;306:1104 –1112.
12.Verma S, Siu SC. Aortic dilatation in patients with
bicuspid aortic valve. N Engl J Med . 2014;370:1920 –
1929.
13.Wojnarski CM, Svensson LG, Roselli EE, et al. Aortic
dissection in patients with bicuspid aortic valve-
associated aneurysms. Ann Thorac Surg . 2015;100:
1666 –1673; discussion 1673-1674.
14.McKellar SH, Michelena HI, Li Z, et al. Long-term
risk of aortic events following aortic valve replacementin patients with bicuspid aortic valves. Am J Cardiol .
2010;106:1626 –1633.
15.Sperling JS, Lubat E. Forme fruste or ’incom-
plete ’bicuspid aortic valves with very small ra-
phes: the prevalence of bicuspid valve and itssigniﬁcance may be underestimated. Int J Cardiol .
2015;184:1 –5.
16.Otto CM, Nishimura RA, Bonow RO, et al. 2020
ACC/AHA guideline for the management of patientswith valvular heart disease: a report of the American
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association
Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2021;77:e25 –e197.
17.Musunuru K, Hershberger RE, Day SM, et al.
Genetic testing for inherited cardiovascular dis-
eases: a scienti ﬁc statement from the American
Heart Association. Circ Genom Precis Med .
2020;13:e000067.
18.Tessler I, Leshno M, Shmueli A, et al. Cost-effec-
tiveness analysis of screening for ﬁrst-degree relatives
of patients with bicuspid aortic valve. Eur Heart J Qual
Care Clin Outcomes . 2021;7:447 –457.
6.1.3.1 Routine Follow-Up of BAV Disease
Aortopathy
1.Michelena HI, Desjardins VA, Avierinos JF, et al.
Natural history of asymptomatic patients with nor-mally functioning or minimally dysfunctional bicuspidaortic valve in the community. Circulation . 2008;117:
2776 –2784.
2.Michelena HI, Khanna AD, Mahoney D, et al. Inci-
dence of aortic complications in patients with bicuspidaortic valves. JAMA . 2011;306:1104 –1112.JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee361

3.Girdauskas E, Disha K, Raisin HH, et al. Risk of late
aortic events after an isolated aortic valve replacementfor bicuspid aortic valve stenosis with concomitantascending aortic dilation. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg .
2012;42:832 –837; discussion 837-838.
4.Girdauskas E, Disha K, Rouman M, et al. Aortic
events after isolated aortic valve replacement for
bicuspid aortic valve root phenotype: echocardio-graphic follow-up study. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg .
2015;48:e71 –e76.
5.Verma S, Siu SC. Aortic dilatation in patients with
bicuspid aortic valve. N Engl J Med . 2014;370:1920 –
1929.
6.Masri A, Kalahasti V, Svensson LG, et al. Aortic
cross-sectional area/height ratio and outcomes in pa-tients with bicuspid aortic valve and a dilated
ascending aorta. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging . 2017;10:
e006249.
7.Borger MA, Fedak PWM, Stephens EH, et al. The
American Association for Thoracic Surgery consensusguidelines on bicuspid aortic valve-related aortopathy:full online-only version. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg .
2018;156:e41 –e74.
8.McKellar SH, Michelena HI, Li Z, et al. Long-term
risk of aortic events following aortic valve replacement
in patients with bicuspid aortic valves. Am J Cardiol .
2010;106:1626 –1633.
9.Girdauskas E, Disha K, Borger MA, et al. Long-term
prognosis of ascending aortic aneurysm after aorticvalve replacement for bicuspid versus tricuspid aorticvalve stenosis. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2014;147:
276–282.
10.Girdauskas E, Rouman M, Disha K, et al. Aortic
dissection after previous aortic valve replacement forbicuspid aortic valve disease. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2015;66:1409 –1411.
11.Avadhani SA, Martin-Doyle W, Shaikh AY, et al.
Predictors of ascending aortic dilation in bicuspidaortic valve disease: a ﬁve-year prospective study. Am
J Med . 2015;128:647 –652.
12.Devereux RB, de Simone G, Arnett DK, et al.
Normal limits in relation to age, body size and genderof two-dimensional echocardiographic aortic root di-mensions in persons $15 years of age. Am J Cardiol .
2012;110:1189 –1194.
6.1.3.2. BAV Aortopathy Interventions:
Replacement of the Aorta in Patients With BAV
1.Borger MA, Fedak PWM, Stephens EH, et al. The
American Association for Thoracic Surgery consensusguidelines on bicuspid aortic valve-related aortopathy:full online-only version. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg .
2018;156:e41 –e74.
2.Otto CM, Nishimura RA, Bonow RO, et al. 2020 ACC/
AHA guideline for the management of patients withvalvular heart disease: a report of the American Col-
lege of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint
Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll
Cardiol
. 2021;77:e25 –e197.
3.Masri A, Kalahasti V, Svensson LG, et al. Aortic cross-
sectional area/height ratio and outcomes in patientswith bicuspid aortic valve and a dilated ascending aorta.Circ Cardiovasc Imaging . 2017;10:e006249.
4.Svensson LG, Blackstone EH, Cosgrove DM III. Sur-
gical options in young adults with aortic valve disease.Curr Probl Cardiol . 2003;28:417 –480.5.Wojnarski CM, Svensson LG, Roselli EE, et al. Aortic
dissection in patients with bicuspid aortic valve-associated aneurysms. Ann Thorac Surg . 2015;100:
1666 –1673; discussion 1673-1674.
6.Borger MA, Preston M, Ivanov J, et al. Should the
ascending aorta be replaced more frequently in pa-
tients with bicuspid aortic valve disease? J Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg . 2004;128:677 –683.
7.Braverman AC. Aortic replacement for bicuspid
aortic valve aortopathy: when and why? J Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg . 2019;157:520 –525.
8.Michelena HI, Khanna AD, Mahoney D, et al. Inci-
dence of aortic complications in patients with bicuspid
aortic valves. JAMA . 2011;306:1104 –1112.
9.Zafar MA, Li Y, Rizzo JA, et al. Height alone, rather
than body surface area, suf ﬁces for risk estimation in
ascending aortic aneurysm. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg .
2018;155:1938 –1950.
10.Chen Y, Lin Y, Zhang H, et al. Relationship of
platelet counts and in ﬂammatory markers to 30-day
mortality risk in patients with acute type A aorticdissection. Biomed Res Int . 2020;2020:1057496.
11.Oliver JM, Alonso-Gonzalez R, Gonzalez AE, et al.
Risk of aortic root or ascending aorta complications inpatients with bicuspid aortic valve with and withoutcoarctation of the aorta. Am J Cardiol . 2009;104:
1001 –1006.
12.Duijnhouwer A, van den Hoven A, Merkx R, et al.
Differences in aortopathy in patients with a bicuspidaortic valve with or without aortic coarctation. J Clin
Med. 2020;9:290.
13.Girdauskas E, Disha K, Raisin HH, et al. Risk of late
aortic events after an isolated aortic valve replacement
for bicuspid aortic valve stenosis with concomitant
ascending aortic dilation. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg .
2012;42:832 –837; discussion 837-838.
14.Girdauskas E, Disha K, Rouman M, et al. Aortic
events after isolated aortic valve replacement forbicuspid aortic valve root phenotype: echocardio-graphic follow-up study. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg .
2015;48:e71 –e76.
15.Kim JB, Spotnitz M, Lindsay ME, et al. Risk of aortic
dissection in the moderately dilated ascending aorta.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2016;68:1209
–1219.
6.2. AAA: Cause, Risk Factors, and Screening
1.Guirguis-Blake JM, Beil TL, Senger CA, et al. Primary
care screening for abdominal aortic aneurysm: updated
evidence report and systematic review for the USPreventive Services Task Force. JAMA . 2019;322:2219 –
2238.
2.Sakalihasan N, Defraigne JO, Kerstenne MA, et al.
Family members of patients with abdominal aorticaneurysms are at increased risk for aneurysms: analysisof 618 probands and their families from the Liège AAA
Family Study. Ann Vasc Surg . 2014;28:787 –797.
3.Kuivaniemi H, Shibamura H, Arthur C, et al. Familial
abdominal aortic aneurysms: collection of 233 multi-plex families. J Vasc Surg . 2003;37:340 –345.
4.Carter JL, Morris DR, Sherliker P, et al. Sex-speci ﬁc
associations of vascular risk factors with abdominalaortic aneurysm: ﬁndings from 1.5 million women and
0.8 million men in the United States and United
Kingdom. J Am Heart Assoc . 2020;9:e014748.
5.Dansey KD, Varkevisser RRB, Swerdlow NJ, et al.
Epidemiology of endovascular and open repair forabdominal aortic aneurysms in the United States from
2004-2015 and implications for screening. J Vasc Surg .
2021;74:414 –424.
6.Linne A, Forsberg J, Lindstrom D, et al. Age at
detection of abdominal aortic aneurysms in siblings ofpatients with abdominal aortic aneurysms. J Vasc Surg .
2016;63:883 –887.
7.Davies MJ. Aortic aneurysm formation: lessons from
human studies and experimental models. Circulation .
1998;98:193 –195.
8.Sakalihasan N, Michel JB, Katsargyris A, et al.
Abdominal aortic aneurysms. Nat Rev Dis Primers .
2018;4:34.
9.Kent KC, Zwolak RM, Egorova NN, et al. Analysis of
risk factors for abdominal aortic aneurysm in a cohortof more than 3 million individuals. J Vasc Surg .
2010;52:539 –548.
10.Altobelli E, Rapacchietta L, Profeta VF, et al. Risk
factors for abdominal aortic aneurysm in population-
based studies: a systematic review and meta-anal-
ysis. Int J Environ Res Public Health . 2018;15:2805.
11.Tang W, Yao L, Roetker NS, et al. Lifetime risk and
risk factors for abdominal aortic aneurysm in a 24-year
prospective study: the ARIC Study (AtherosclerosisRisk in Communities). Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol .
2016;36:2468 –2477.
12.Larsson E, Granath F, Swedenborg J, et al.
A population-based case-control study of the familialrisk of abdominal aortic aneurysm. J Vasc Surg .
2009;49:47 –50; discussion 51.
13.Saadoun D, Vautier M, Cacoub P. Medium- and
large-vessel vasculitis. Circulation . 2021;143:267 –282.
14.Sörelius K, Budtz-Lilly J, Mani K, et al. Systematic
review of the management of mycotic aortic aneu-rysms. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg . 2019;58:426 –435.
15.Brady AR, Thompson SG, Fowkes FG, et al.
Abdominal aortic aneurysm expansion: risk factors and
time intervals for surveillance. Circulation . 2004;110:
16–21.
16.Sweeting MJ, Thompson SG, Brown LC, et al.
Meta-analysis of individual patient data to examinefactors affecting growth and rupture of small
abdominal aortic aneurysms. Br J Surg . 2012;99:655 –
665.
17.Akai A, Watanabe Y, Hoshina K, et al. Family history
of aortic aneurysm is an independent risk factor formore rapid growth of small abdominal aortic aneu-rysms in Japan. J Vasc Surg . 2015;61:287 –290.
18.Howard DP, Banerjee A, Fairhead JF, et al. Popu-
lation-based study of incidence of acute abdominal
aortic aneurysms with projected impact of screeningstrategy. J Am Heart Assoc . 2015;4:e001926.
6.3. Growth and Natural History of Aortic
Aneurysms
1.Bashir M, Fok M, Hammoud I, et al. A perspective on
natural history and survival in nonoperated thoracicaortic aneurysm patients. Aorta (Stamford) . 2013;1:
182–189.
2.Harky A, Bashir M, Antoniou A, et al. Size and
dissection: what is the relation? Indian J Thorac Car-
diovasc Surg . 2019;35:72 –78.
3.Kuzmik GA, Sang AX, Elefteriades JA. Natural his-
tory of thoracic aortic aneurysms. J Vasc Surg .
2012;56:565 –571.Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e362

4.Saeyeldin A, Zafar MA, Velasquez CA, et al. Natural
history of aortic root aneurysms in Marfan syndrome.Ann Cardiothorac Surg . 2017;6:625 –632.
5.Della Corte A, Bancone C, Buonocore M, et al.
Pattern of ascending aortic dimensions predicts thegrowth rate of the aorta in patients with bicuspid
aortic valve. J Am Coll Cardiol Img . 2013;6:1301 –1310.
6.Kim JB, Spotnitz M, Lindsay ME, et al. Risk of aortic
dissection in the moderately dilated ascending aorta.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2016;68:1209 –1219.
7.Yiu RS, Cheng SW. Natural history and risk factors
for rupture of thoracic aortic arch aneurysms. J Vasc
Surg. 2016;63:1189 –1194.
8.Zafar MA, Chen JF, Wu J, et al. Natural history of
descending thoracic and thoracoabdominal aortic an-eurysms. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2021;161:498 –511.
e1.
9.Hendy K, Gunnarson R, Golledge J. Growth rates of
small abdominal aortic aneurysms assessed by com-
puterised tomography —a systematic literature review.
Atherosclerosis . 2014;235:182 –188.
6.4. Medical Management of Sporadic and
Degenerative Aortic Aneurysm Disease
1.Smith SC Jr, Allen J, Blair SN, et al. AHA/ACC
guidelines for secondary prevention for patients withcoronary and other atherosclerotic vascular disease:2006 update. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2006;47:2130 –2139.
2.Davies MJ. Aortic aneurysm formation: lessons from
human studies and experimental models. Circulation .
1998;98:193 –195.
3.Danyi P, Elefteriades JA, Jovin IS. Medical therapy of
thoracic aortic aneurysms: are we there yet? Circula-
tion. 2011;124:1469 –1476.
6.4.1.1. BP Management in Sporadic TAA
1.Whelton PK, Carey RM, Aronow WS, et al. 2017 ACC/
AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/ASPC/NMA/PCNA guideline for the prevention, detection, evalua-tion, and management of high blood pressure inadults: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical
Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2018;71:e127 –
e248.
2.Lewington S, Clarke R, Qizilbash N, et al. Age-spe-
ciﬁc relevance of usual blood pressure to vascular
mortality: a meta-analysis of individual data for one
million adults in 61 prospective studies. Lancet .
2002;360:1903 –1913.
3.Ogden LG, He J, Lydick E, et al. Long-term absolute
beneﬁt of lowering blood pressure in hypertensive
patients according to the JNC VI risk strati ﬁcation.
Hypertension
. 2000;35:539 –543.
4.Ladouceur M, Fermanian C, Lupoglazoff JM, et al.
Effect of beta-blockade on ascending aortic dilatation
in children with the Marfan syndrome. Am J Cardiol .
2007;99:406 –409.
5.Shores J, Berger KR, Murphy EA, et al. Progression
of aortic dilatation and the bene ﬁt of long-term beta-
adrenergic blockade in Marfan ’s syndrome. N Engl J
Med. 1994;330:1335 –1341.
6.Al-Abcha A, Saleh Y, Mujer M, et al. Meta-analysis
examining the usefulness of angiotensin receptor
blockers for the prevention of aortic root dilation inpatients with the Marfan syndrome. Am J Cardiol .
2020;128:101 –106.7.Howard DP, Banerjee A, Fairhead JF, et al. Popula-
tion-based study of incidence and outcome of acuteaortic dissection and premorbid risk factor control: 10-year results from the Oxford Vascular Study. Circula-
tion. 2013;127:2031 –2037.
8.Danyi P, Elefteriades JA, Jovin IS. Medical therapy
of thoracic aortic aneurysms: are we there yet? Circu-
lation . 2011;124:1469 –1476.
9.Hofmann Bowman MA, Eagle KA, Milewicz DM.
Update on clinical trials of losartan with and without
b-blockers to block aneurysm growth in patients with
Marfan syndrome: a review. JAMA Cardiol . 2019;4:
702–707.
10.Group SR, Wright JT Jr, Williamson JD, et al.
A randomized trial of intensive versus standard blood-pressure control. N Engl J Med . 2015;373:2103 –2116.
11.Vaduganathan M, Claggett BL, Juraschek SP, et al.
Assessment of long-term bene ﬁt of intensive blood
pressure control on residual life span: secondaryanalysis of the Systolic Blood Pressure InterventionTrial (SPRINT). JAMA Cardiol . 2020;5:576 –581.
12.Mochizuki S, Shimizu M, Taniguchi I, et al. JIKEI
HEART Study —a morbi-mortality and remodeling study
with valsartan in Japanese patients with hypertension
and cardiovascular disease. Cardiovasc Drugs Ther .
2004;18:305 –309.
13.Mochizuki S, Dahlof B, Shimizu M, et al. Valsartan
in a Japanese population with hypertension and othercardiovascular disease (Jikei Heart Study): a rando-mised, open-label, blinded endpoint morbidity-mortality study. Lancet . 2007;369:1431 –1439.
6.4.1.2. Treatment of TAA With Statins
1.Grundy SM, Stone NJ, Bailey AL, et al. 2018 AHA/
ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/ADA/AGS/APhA/ASPC/
NLA/PCNA guideline on the management of blood
cholesterol: a report of the American College of Car-diology/American Heart Association Task Force onClinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;73:
e285 –e350.
2.Cholesterol Treatment Trialists ’(CTT) Collaboration,
Baigent C, Blackwell L, et al. Ef ﬁcacy and safety of
more intensive lowering of LDL cholesterol: a meta-analysis of data from 170,000 participants in 26
randomised trials. Lancet . 2010;376:1670 –1681.
3.Angeloni E, Vitaterna A, Pirelli M, et al. Effects of
statin therapy on ascending aorta aneurysms growth: a
propensity-matched analysis. Int J Cardiol . 2015;191:
52–55.
4.Goel SS, Tuzcu EM, Agarwal S, et al. Comparison of
ascending aortic size in patients with severe bicuspidaortic valve stenosis treated with versus without astatin drug. Am J Cardiol . 2011;108:1458 –1462.
5.Stein LH, Berger J, Tranquilli M, et al. Effect of
statin drugs on thoracic aortic aneurysms. Am J Car-
diol. 2013;112:1240 –1245.
6.Taylor AP, Yadlapati A, Andrei AC, et al. Statin use
and aneurysm risk in patients with bicuspid aortic valvedisease. Clin Cardiol . 2016;39:41 –47.
7.Sato T, Arakawa M, Tashima Y, et al. Statins reduce
thoracic aortic aneurysm growth in Marfan syndrome
mice via inhibition of the ras-induced ERK (Extracel-lular Signal-Regulated Kinase) Signaling Pathway.J Am Heart Assoc . 2018;7:e008543.
8.Expert Panel on Detection, Evaluation, and Treat-
ment of High Blood Cholesterol in Adults. Executivesummary of the third report of the National Choles-
terol Education Program (NCEP) Expert Panel onDetection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High BloodCholesterol in Adults (Adult Treatment Panel III).
JAMA . 2001;285:2486 –2497.
9.Gerhard-Herman MD, Gornik HL, Barrett C, et al.
2016 AHA/ACC guideline on the management of pa-tients with lower extremity peripheral artery disease: areport of the American College of Cardiology/Amer-
ican Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice
Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2017;69:e71 –e126.
10.Evans J, Powell JT, Schwalbe E, et al. Simvastatin
attenuates the activity of matrix metalloprotease-9 inaneurysmal aortic tissue. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg .
2007;34:302 –303.
11.Diehm N, Becker G, Katzen B, et al. Statins are
associated with decreased mortality in abdominal, but
not in thoracic aortic aneurysm patients undergoingendovascular repair: propensity score-adjusted anal-ysis. Vasa . 2008;37:241 –249.
12.Allar BG, Swerdlow NJ, de Guerre L, et al. Preop-
erative statin therapy is associated with higher 5-yearsurvival after thoracic endovascular aortic repair.J Vasc Surg . 2021;74:1996 –2005.
6.4.1.3. Smoking Cessation in TAA
1.Katz DA, Holman JE, Nugent AS, et al. The emer-
gency department action in smoking cessation(EDASC) trial: impact on cessation outcomes. Nicotine
Tob Res . 2013;15:1032 –1043.
2.Whitlock EP, Orleans CT, Pender N, et al. Evaluating
primary care behavioral counseling interventions: anevidence-based approach. Am J Prev Med . 2002;22:
267–284.
3.Fiore MC, Jaén CR, Baker TB, et al. Treating tobacco
use and dependence: 2008 update. Clinical practice
guideline . US Dept. of Health and Human Services.
Public Health Service; May 2008.
4.Berry KM, Reynolds LM, Collins JM, et al. E-ciga-
rette initiation and associated changes in smokingcessation and reduction: the Population Assessment ofTobacco and Health Study, 2013-2015. Tob Control .
2019;28:42 –49.
5.Dapunt OE, Galla JD, Sadeghi AM, et al. The natural
history of thoracic aortic aneurysms. J Thorac Car-
diovasc Surg . 1994;107:1323 –1332; discussion 1332-
1333.
6.Gu BH, Choi JC, Shen YH, et al. Elastin-speci ﬁc
autoimmunity in smokers with thoracic aortic aneu-rysm and dissection is independent of chronicobstructive pulmonary disease. J Am Heart Assoc .
2019;8:e011671.
7.Fetterman JL, Keith RJ, Palmisano JN, et al. Alter-
ations in vascular function associated with the use of
combustible and electronic cigarettes. J Am Heart
Assoc . 2020;9:e014570.
8.Fetterman JL, Weisbrod RM, Feng B, et al. Flavor-
ings in tobacco products induce endothelial cell
dysfunction. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol . 2018;38:
1607 –1615.
6.4.1.4 Antiplatelet Therapy in TAA
1.Smith SC Jr, Allen J, Blair SN, et al. AHA/ACC
guidelines for secondary prevention for patients withcoronary and other atherosclerotic vascular disease:2006 update. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2006;47:2130 –2139.JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee363

2.Agmon Y, Khandheria BK, Meissner I, et al. Relation
of coronary artery disease and cerebrovascular diseasewith atherosclerosis of the thoracic aorta in the gen-eral population. Am J Cardiol . 2002;89:262 –267.
3.Expert Panel on Detection, Evaluation, and Treat-
ment of High Blood Cholesterol in Adults. Executivesummary of the third report of the National Choles-terol Education Program (NCEP) Expert Panel on
Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood
Cholesterol in Adults (Adult Treatment Panel III).JAMA . 2001;285:2486 –2497.
6.4.2.1. BP Management in AAA
1.Whelton PK, Carey RM, Aronow WS, et al. 2017 ACC/
AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/ASPC/NMA/PCNA guideline for the prevention, detection, evalua-tion, and management of high blood pressure inadults: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical
Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2018;71:e127 –
e248.
2.Lewington S, Clarke R, Qizilbash N, et al. Age-spe-
ciﬁc relevance of usual blood pressure to vascular
mortality: a meta-analysis of individual data for one
million adults in 61 prospective studies. Lancet .
2002;360:1903 –1913.
3.Ogden LG, He J, Lydick E, et al. Long-term absolute
beneﬁt of lowering blood pressure in hypertensive
patients according to the JNC VI risk strati ﬁcation.
Hypertension . 2000;35:539 –543.
4.Group SR, Wright JT Jr, Williamson JD, et al.
A randomized trial of intensive versus standard blood-
pressure control. N Engl J Med . 2015;373:2103 –2116.
5.Vaduganathan M, Claggett BL, Juraschek SP, et al.
Assessment of long-term bene ﬁt of intensive blood
pressure control on residual life span: secondaryanalysis of the Systolic Blood Pressure InterventionTrial (SPRINT). JAMA Cardiol . 2020;5:576 –581.
6.4.2.2. Treatment of AAA With Statins
1.Whelton PK, Carey RM, Aronow WS, et al. 2017 ACC/
AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/ASPC/NMA/PCNA guideline for the prevention, detection, evalua-tion, and management of high blood pressure inadults: a report of the American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical
Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2018;71:e127 –
e248.
2.Lewington S, Clarke R, Qizilbash N, et al. Age-spe-
ciﬁc relevance of usual blood pressure to vascular
mortality: a meta-analysis of individual data for onemillion adults in 61 prospective studies. Lancet .
2002;360:1903 –1913.
3.Ogden LG, He J, Lydick E, et al. Long-term absolute
beneﬁt of lowering blood pressure in hypertensive
patients according to the JNC VI risk strati ﬁcation.
Hypertension . 2000;35:539 –543.
4.Salata K, Syed M, Hussain MA, et al. Statins reduce
abdominal aortic aneurysm growth, rupture, and
perioperative mortality: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Am Heart Assoc . 2018;7:e008657.
5.Ferguson CD, Clancy P, Bourke B, et al. Association
of statin prescription with small abdominal aorticaneurysm progression. Am Heart J . 2010;159:307 –313.
6.Expert Panel on Detection, Evaluation, and Treat-
ment of High Blood Cholesterol in Adults. Executive
summary of the third report of the NationalCholesterol Education Program (NCEP) Expert Panel
on Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High BloodCholesterol in Adults (Adult Treatment Panel III).JAMA . 2001;285:2486 –2497.
7.Cholesterol Treatment Trialists ’(CTT) Collaboration,
Baigent C, Blackwell L, et al. Ef ﬁcacy and safety of
more intensive lowering of LDL cholesterol: a meta-analysis of data from 170,000 participants in 26randomised trials. Lancet . 2010;376:1670 –1681.
8.Regalado ES, Mellor-Crummey L, De BJ, et al.
Clinical history and management recommendations ofthe smooth muscle dysfunction syndrome due toACTA2 arginine 179 alterations. Genet Med . 2018;20:
1206 –1215.
9.Grundy SM, Stone NJ, Bailey AL, et al. 2018 AHA/
ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/ADA/AGS/APhA/ASPC/NLA/PCNA guideline on the management of bloodcholesterol: a report of the American College of Car-diology/American Heart Association Task Force onClinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;73:
e285 –e350.
10.Wemmelund H, Hogh A, Hundborg HH, et al. Statin
use and rupture of abdominal aortic aneurysm. Br J
Surg. 2014;101:966 –975.
11.Leurs LJ, Visser P, Laheij RJ, et al. Statin use is
associated with reduced all-cause mortality afterendovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repair.Vascular . 2006;14:1 –8.
12.O’Donnell TFX, Deery SE, Shean KE, et al. Statin
therapy is associated with higher long-term but not
perioperative survival after abdominal aortic aneurysm
repair. J Vasc Surg . 2018;68:392 –399.
6.4.2.3. Smoking Cessation in AAA
1.Katz DA, Holman JE, Nugent AS, et al. The emer-
gency department action in smoking cessation(EDASC) trial: impact on cessation outcomes. Nicotine
Tob Res . 2013;15:1032 –1043.
2.Whitlock EP, Orleans CT, Pender N, et al. Evaluating
primary care behavioral counseling interventions: anevidence-based approach. Am J Prev Med . 2002;22:
267–284.
3.Fiore MC, Jaén CR, Baker TB, et al. Treating tobacco
use and dependence: 2008 update. Clinical practiceguideline . US Dept. of Health and Human Services.
Public Health Service; May 2008.
4.Berry KM, Reynolds LM, Collins JM, et al. E-ciga-
rette initiation and associated changes in smokingcessation and reduction: the Population Assessment ofTobacco and Health Study, 2013-2015. Tob Control .
2019;28:42 –49.
6.4.2.4. Antithrombotic Therapy in AAA
1.Wemmelund H, Jorgensen TM, Hogh A, et al. Low-
dose aspirin and rupture of abdominal aortic aneurysm.
J Vasc Surg . 2017;65:616 –625.e4.
2.Expert Panel on Detection, Evaluation, and Treat-
ment of High Blood Cholesterol in Adults. Executivesummary of the third report of the National Choles-terol Education Program (NCEP) Expert Panel onDetection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood
Cholesterol in Adults (Adult Treatment Panel III).
JAMA . 2001;285:2486 –2497.
3.Smith SC Jr, Allen J, Blair SN, et al. AHA/ACC
guidelines for secondary prevention for patients withcoronary and other atherosclerotic vascular disease:
2006 update. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2006;47:2130 –2139.
6.4.3.1 Surveillance of Thoracic Aortic Dilation
and Aneurysm
1.Hiratzka LF, Bakris GL, Beckman JA, et al. 2010
ACCF/AHA/AATS/ACR/ASA/SCA/SCAI/SIR/STS/SVMguidelines for the diagnosis and management of pa-tients with thoracic aortic disease: a report of theAmerican College of Cardiology Foundation/American
Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines,
American Association for Thoracic Surgery, AmericanCollege of Radiology, American Stroke Association,Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists, Societyfor Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions,Society of Interventional Radiology, Society of
Thoracic Surgeons, and Society for Vascular Medicine.
J Am Coll Cardiol . 2010;55:e27 –e129.
2.Erbel R, Aboyans V, Boileau C, et al. 2014 ESC
guidelines on the diagnosis and treatment of aorticdiseases: document covering acute and chronicaortic diseases of the thoracic and abdominal aortaof the adult. The Task Force for the Diagnosis andTreatment of Aortic Diseases of the European So-
ciety of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J . 2014;35:
2873 –2926.
3.Goldstein SA, Evangelista A, Abbara S, et al.
Multimodality imaging of diseases of the thoracicaorta in adults: from the American Society ofEchocardiography and the European Association ofCardiovascular Imaging. J Am Soc Echocardiogr .
2015;28:119 –182.
4.Wang TKM, Desai MY. Thoracic aortic aneurysm:
optimal surveillance and treatment. Cleve Clin J Med .
2020;87:557 –568.
5.Agarwal PP, Chughtai A, Matzinger FR, et al. Mul-
tidetector CT of thoracic aortic aneurysms. Radio-
graphics . 2009;29:537 –552.
6.Freeman LA, Young PM, Foley TA, et al. CT and MRI
assessment of the aortic root and ascending aorta. AJR
Am J Roentgenol . 2013;200:W581 –W592.
7.Poskaite P, Pamminger M, Kranewitter C, et al. Self-
navigated 3D whole-heart MRA for non-enhancedsurveillance of thoracic aortic dilation: a comparison
to CTA. Magn Reson Imaging . 2021;76:123 –130.
8.Kuzmik GA, Sang AX, Elefteriades JA. Natural his-
tory of thoracic aortic aneurysms. J Vasc Surg .
2012;56:565 –571.
9.Gagne-Loranger M, Dumont E, Voisine P, et al.
Natural history of 40-50 mm root/ascending aorticaneurysms in the current era of dedicated thoracicaortic clinics. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg
. 2016;50:562 –
566.
6.4.3.2. Surveillance of Abdominal Aortic Dila-
tion and Aneurysm
1.Erbel R, Aboyans V, Boileau C, et al. 2014 ESC
guidelines on the diagnosis and treatment of aortic
diseases: document covering acute and chronic aorticdiseases of the thoracic and abdominal aorta of theadult. The Task Force for the Diagnosis and Treatmentof Aortic Diseases of the European Society of Cardi-ology (ESC). Eur Heart J . 2014;35:2873 –2926.
2.Brady AR, Thompson SG, Fowkes FG, et al.
Abdominal aortic aneurysm expansion: risk factors andtime intervals for surveillance. Circulation . 2004;110:
16–21.Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e364

3.Marcaccio CL, Schermerhorn ML. Epidemiology of
abdominal aortic aneurysms. Semin Vasc Surg .
2021;34:29 –37.
4.RESCAN Collaborators, Bown MJ, Sweeting MJ,
et al. Surveillance intervals for small abdominal aortic
aneurysms: a meta-analysis. JAMA . 2013;309:806 –
813.
5.Badger SA, Jones C, McClements J, et al. Surveil-
lance strategies according to the rate of growth ofsmall abdominal aortic aneurysms. Vasc Med . 2011;16:
415–421.
6.Hendy K, Gunnarson R, Golledge J. Growth rates of
small abdominal aortic aneurysms assessed by com-puterised tomography —a systematic literature review.
Atherosclerosis . 2014;235:182 –188.
7.Oliver-Williams C, Sweeting MJ, Jacomelli J, et al.
Safety of men with small and medium abdominal aorticaneurysms under surveillance in the NAAASP. Circula-
tion. 2019;139:1371 –1380.
8.Thompson S, Brown L, Sweeting M, et al. Sys-
tematic review and meta-analysis of the growth
and rupture rates of small abdominal aortic an-
eurysms: implications for surveillance intervals andtheir cost-effectiveness. Health Technol Assess .
2013;17:1 –118.
9.S a l e h iR a v e s hM ,L a n g g u t hP ,P f a r rJ A ,e ta l .
Non-contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imag-ing for visualization and quanti ﬁcation of endo-
vascular aortic prosthesis, their endoleaks andaneurysm sacs at 1.5T. Magn Reson Imaging .
2019;60:164 –172.
10.Kawada H, Goshima S, Sakurai K, et al. Utility of
noncontrast magnetic resonance angiography foraneurysm follow-up and detection of endoleaks afterendovascular aortic repair. Korean J Radiol . 2021;22:
513–524.
11.Chaikof EL, Dalman RL, Eskandari MK, et al. The
Society for Vascular Surgery practice guidelines on thecare of patients with an abdominal aortic aneurysm.J Vasc Surg . 2018;67:2 –77.e72.
6.5. Surgical and Endovascular Management of
Aortic Aneurysms
1.Schanzer A, Greenberg RK, Hevelone N, et al. Pre-
dictors of abdominal aortic aneurysm sac enlargement
after endovascular repair. Circulation . 2011;123:2848 –
2855.
6.5.1. Surgery for Sporadic Aneurysms of the
Aortic Root and Ascending Aorta
1.Kouchoukos NT. Composite graft replacement of the
ascending aorta and aortic valve with the inclusion-wrap and open techniques. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc
Surg. 1991;3:171 –176.
2.Mehta RH, Suzuki T, Hagan PG, et al. Predicting
death in patients with acute type A aortic dissection.Circulation . 2002;105:200 –
206.
3.Borger MA, Fedak PWM, Stephens EH, et al. The
American Association for Thoracic Surgery consensus
guidelines on bicuspid aortic valve-related aortopathy:executive summary. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg .
2018;156:473 –480.
4.Hiratzka LF, Bakris GL, Beckman JA, et al. 2010
ACCF/AHA/AATS/ACR/ASA/SCA/SCAI/SIR/STS/SVM
guidelines for the diagnosis and management of pa-tients with thoracic aortic disease: a report of theAmerican College of Cardiology Foundation/American
Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines,American Association for Thoracic Surgery, AmericanCollege of Radiology, American Stroke Association,
Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists, Society
for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions,Society of Interventional Radiology, Society ofThoracic Surgeons, and Society for Vascular Medicine.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2010;55:e27 –e129.
5.Hiratzka LF, Creager MA, Isselbacher EM, et al.
Surgery for aortic dilatation in patients with bicuspidaortic valves: a statement of clari ﬁcation from the
American College of Cardiology/American Heart As-
sociation Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J
Am Coll Cardiol. 2016;67:724 –731.
6.Svensson LG, Adams DH, Bonow RO, et al. Aortic
valve and ascending aorta guidelines for managementand quality measures. Ann Thorac Surg . 2013;95:S1 –
S66.
7.Coady MA, Rizzo JA, Hammond GL, et al. What is the
appropriate size criterion for resection of thoracicaortic aneurysms? J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 1997;113:
476–491.
8.Davies RR, Goldstein LJ, Coady MA, et al. Yearly
rupture or dissection rates for thoracic aortic aneu-
rysms: simple prediction based on size. Ann Thorac
Surg. 2002;73:17 –27; discussion 27-28.
9.Ziganshin BA, Zafar MA, Elefteriades JA. Descending
threshold for ascending aortic aneurysmectomy: is ittime for a "left-shift" in guidelines? J Thorac Car-
diovasc Surg . 2019;157:37 –42.
10.Avadhani SA, Martin-Doyle W, Shaikh AY, et al.
Predictors of ascending aortic dilation in bicuspid
aortic valve disease: a ﬁve-year prospective study. Am
J Med . 2015;128:647 –652.
11.Kerneis C, Pasi N, Arangalage D, et al. Ascending
aorta dilatation rates in patients with tricuspid andbicuspid aortic stenosis: the COFRASA/GENERACstudy. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging . 2018;19:792 –
799.
12.Oladokun D, Patterson BO, Sobocinski J, et al.
Systematic review of the growth rates and in ﬂuencing
factors in thoracic aortic aneurysms. Eur J Vasc Endo-
vasc Surg . 2016;51:674 –681.
13.Erbel R, Aboyans V, Boileau C, et al. 2014 ESC
guidelines on the diagnosis and treatment of aorticdiseases: document covering acute and chronic aorticdiseases of the thoracic and abdominal aorta of theadult. The Task Force for the Diagnosis and Treatmentof Aortic Diseases of the European Society of Cardi-
ology (ESC). Eur Heart J . 2014;35:2873 –
2926.
14.Masri A, Kalahasti V, Svensson LG, et al. Aortic
cross-sectional area/height ratio and outcomes in pa-
tients with bicuspid aortic valve and a dilated ascendingaorta. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging . 2017;10:e006249.
15.Masri A, Kalahasti V, Svensson LG, et al. Aortic
cross-sectional area/height ratio and outcomes in pa-tients with a trilea ﬂet aortic valve and a dilated aorta.
Circulation . 2016;134:1724 –1737.
16.Wojnarski CM, Svensson LG, Roselli EE, et al. Aortic
dissection in patients with bicuspid aortic valve-
associated aneurysms. Ann Thorac Surg . 2015;100:
1666 –1673; discussion 1673-1674.
17.Kim JB, Spotnitz M, Lindsay ME, et al. Risk of aortic
dissection in the moderately dilated ascending aorta.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2016;68:1209 –1219.18.Idrees JJ, Roselli EE, Blackstone EH, et al. Risk of
adding prophylactic aorta replacement to a cardiacoperation. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2020;159:1669 –
1678.e10.
19.Hui SK, Fan CS, Christie S, et al. The aortic root
does not dilate over time after replacement of the
aortic valve and ascending aorta in patients with
bicuspid or tricuspid aortic valves. J Thorac Cardiovasc
Surg. 2018;156:5 –13.e11.
20.Peterss S, Bhandari R, Rizzo JA, et al. The aortic
root: natural history after root-sparing ascendingreplacement in nonsyndromic aneurysmal patients.Ann Thorac Surg . 2017;103:828 –833.
21.Peterss S, Charilaou P, Dumfarth J, et al. Aortic
valve disease with ascending aortic aneurysm: Impactof concomitant root-sparing (supracoronary) aortic
replacement in nonsyndromic patients. J Thorac Car-
diovasc Surg . 2016;152:791 –798.e1.
22.Acharya MN, Yousse ﬁP, Soppa G, et al. Analysis of
aortic area/height ratio in patients with thoracic aorticaneurysm and type A dissection. Eur J Cardiothorac
Surg. 2018;54:696 –701.
23.Zafar MA, Li Y, Rizzo JA, et al. Height alone, rather
than body surface area, suf ﬁces for risk estimation in
ascending aortic aneurysm. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg .
2018;155:1938 –1950.
24.Thubrikar MJ, Agali P, Robicsek F. Wall stress as a
possible mechanism for the development of transverse
intimal tears in aortic dissections. J Med Eng Technol .
1999;23:127 –134.
25.Emerel L, Thunes J, Kickliter T, et al. Predissection-
derived geometric and distensibility indices revealincreased peak longitudinal stress and stiffness in pa-tients sustaining acute type A aortic dissection: impli-cations for predicting dissection. J Thorac Cardiovasc
Surg. 2019;158:355 –363.
26.Plonek T, Zak M, Rylski B, et al. Wall stress cor-
relates with intimal entry tear localization in type A
aortic dissection. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg .
2018;27:797 –801.
27.Gomez A, Wang Z, Xuan Y, et al. Abstract 16886:
wall stress pro ﬁles in tricuspid aortic valve associated
ascending thoracic aortic aneurysms: the effect ofsurgical threshold diameter $5.5cm. Circulation .
2020;142(suppl 3):A16886.
28.Pichamuthu JE, Phillippi JA, Cleary DA, et al. Dif-
ferential tensile strength and collagen composition in
ascending aortic aneurysms by aortic valve phenotype.Ann Thorac Surg . 2013;96:2147 –2154.
29.Bollache E, Guzzardi DG, Sattari S, et al. Aortic
valve-mediated wall shear stress is heterogeneous andpredicts regional aortic elastic ﬁber thinning in
bicuspid aortic valve-associated aortopathy. J Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg . 2018;156:2112 –2120.e2.
30.Emmott A, Garcia J, Chung J, et al. Biome-
chanics of the ascending thoracic aorta: a clinical
perspective on engineering data. Can J Cardiol .
2016;32:35 –47.
31.Rylski B, Blanke P, Beyersdorf F, et al. How does
the ascending aorta geometry change when it dis-sects? J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;63:1311 –1319.
32.Pape LA, Tsai TT, Isselbacher EM, et al. Aortic
diameter >or¼5.5 cm is not a good predictor of type
A aortic dissection: observations from the International
Registry of Acute Aortic Dissection (IRAD). Circulation .
2007;116:1120 –1127.JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee365

33.Saeyeldin A, Zafar MA, Li Y, et al. Decision-making
algorithm for ascending aortic aneurysm: effectivenessin clinical application? J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg .
2019;157:1733 –1745.
34.Gagne-Loranger M, Dumont E, Voisine P, et al.
Natural history of 40-50 mm root/ascending aorticaneurysms in the current era of dedicated thoracicaortic clinics. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg . 2016;50:562 –
566.
35.Elefteriades JA, Mukherjee SK, Mojibian H. Dis-
crepancies in measurement of the thoracic aorta: JACCreview topic of the week. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2020;76:
201–217.
36.Guo MH, Appoo JJ, Saczkowski R, et al. Association
of mortality and acute aortic events with ascendingaortic aneurysm: a systematic review and meta-anal-
ysis. JAMA Netw Open . 2018;1:e181281.
37.Paruchuri V, Salhab KF, Kuzmik G, et al. Aortic size
distribution in the general population: explaining thesize paradox in aortic dissection. Cardiology . 2015;131:
265–272.
38.Mori M, Shioda K, Wang X, et al. Perioperative risk
proﬁles and volume-outcome relationships in proximal
thoracic aortic surgery. Ann Thorac Surg . 2018;106:
1095 –1104.
39.Guo MH, Appoo JJ, Wells GA, et al. Protocol for a
randomised controlled trial for Treatment in ThoracicAortic Aneurysm: Surgery versus Surveillance (TITAN:
SvS). BMJ Open . 2021;11:e052070.
40.Girdauskas E, Rouman M, Disha K, et al. Aortic
dissection after previous aortic valve replacement forbicuspid aortic valve disease. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2015;66:1409 –1411.
41.Kaneko T, Shekar P, Ivkovic V, et al. Should the
dilated ascending aorta be repaired at the time ofbicuspid aortic valve replacement? Eur J Cardiothorac
Surg. 2018;53:560 –568.
42.Svensson LG, Kim KH, Blackstone EH, et al.
Bicuspid aortic valve surgery with proactive ascendingaorta repair. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2011;142:622 –
629, 629.e1-3.
43.Borger MA, Preston M, Ivanov J, et al. Should the
ascending aorta be replaced more frequently in pa-tients with bicuspid aortic valve disease? J Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg . 2004;128:677 –683.
44.Mansour AM, Peterss S, Zafar MA, et al. Prevention
of aortic dissection suggests a diameter shift to alower aortic size threshold for intervention. Cardiol-
ogy. 2018;139:139 –146.
45.Heuts S, Adriaans BP, Gerretsen S, et al. Aortic
elongation part II: the risk of acute type A aorticdissection. Heart . 2018;104:1778 –1782.
46.
Kruger T, Sandoval Boburg R, Lescan M, et al.
Aortic elongation in aortic aneurysm and dissection:the Tubingen Aortic Pathoanatomy (TAIPAN) project.Eur J Cardiothorac Surg . 2018;54:26 –33.
47.Wu J, Zafar MA, Li Y, et al. Ascending aortic
length and risk of aortic adverse events: theneglected dimension. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2019;74:
1883 –1894.
48.Gomez A, Wang Z, Xuan Y, et al. Wall stress dis-
tribution in bicuspid aortic valve-associated ascendingthoracic aortic aneurysms. Ann Thorac Surg . 2020;110:
807 –814.
49.Wang Z, Flores N, Lum M, et al. Wall stress ana-
lyses in patients with $5 cm versus <5 cm ascendingthoracic aortic aneurysm. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg .
2021;162:1452 –1459.
50.Xuan Y, Wang Z, Liu R, et al. Wall stress on
ascending thoracic aortic aneurysms with bicuspidcompared with tricuspid aortic valve. J Thorac Car-
diovasc Surg . 2018;156:492 –500.
6.5.1.1. Surgical Approach for Patients With
Sporadic Aneurysms of the Aortic Root and
Ascending Aorta Meeting Criteria for Surgery
1.Mori M, Shioda K, Wang X, et al. Perioperative risk
proﬁles and volume-outcome relationships in proximal
thoracic aortic surgery. Ann Thorac Surg . 2018;106:
1095 –1104.
2.Mullan CW, Mori M, Bin Mahmood SU, et al.
Incidence and characteristics of hospitalization
for proximal aortic surgery for acute syndromes
and for aneurysms in the USA from 2005to 2014. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg . 2020;58:583 –
589.
3.Girdauskas E, Rouman M, Disha K, et al. The fate of
mild-to-moderate proximal aortic dilatation after iso-lated aortic valve replacement for bicuspid aortic valvestenosis: a magnetic resonance imaging follow-up
study. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg . 2016;49:e80 –e86;
discussion e86-e87.
4.Hui SK, Fan CS, Christie S, et al. The aortic root does
not dilate over time after replacement of the aorticvalve and ascending aorta in patients with bicuspid ortricuspid aortic valves. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg .
2018;156:5 –13.e11.
5.Peterss S, Bhandari R, Rizzo JA, et al. The aortic
root: natural history after root-sparing ascendingreplacement in nonsyndromic aneurysmal patients.
Ann Thorac Surg . 2017;103:828 –833.
6.Vendramin I, Meneguzzi M, Sponga S, et al. Bicuspid
aortic valve disease and ascending aortic aneurysm:
should an aortic root replacement be mandatory? Eur J
Cardiothorac Surg . 2016;49:103 –109.
7.Preventza O, Coselli JS, Price MD, et al. Elective
primary aortic root replacement with and without
hemiarch repair in patients with no previous cardiacsurgery. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2017;153:1402 –
1408.
8.McCarthy FH, Bavaria JE, McDermott KM, et al.
At the root of the repair debate: outcomes after
elective aortic root replacements for aortic insuf ﬁ-
ciency with aneurysm. Ann Thorac Surg . 2016;102:
1199 –1205.
9.David TE, David CM, Ouzounian M, et al. A progress
report on reimplantation of the aortic valve. J Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg . 2021;161:890 –899.e1.
10.Kari FA, Doll KN, Hemmer W, et al. Survival and
freedom from aortic valve-related reoperation aftervalve-sparing aortic root replacement in 1015 pa-
tients. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg . 2016;22:431 –
438.
11.Lenoir M, Maesen B, Stevens LM, et al. Reimplan-
tation versus remodelling with ring annuloplasty:comparison of mid-term outcomes after valve-sparingaortic root replacement. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg .
2018;54:48 –54.
12.Arabkhani B, Mookhoek A, Di Centa I, et al. Re-
ported outcome after valve-sparing aortic rootreplacement for aortic root aneurysm: a systematicreview and meta-analysis. Ann Thorac Surg . 2015;100:
1126 –1131.13.Flynn CD, Tian DH, Wilson-Smith A, et al. Sys-
tematic review and meta-analysis of surgical out-comes in Marfan patients undergoing aortic rootsurgery by composite-valve graft or valve sparing
root replacement. Ann Cardiothorac Surg . 2017;6:
570–581.
14.Kari FA, Russe MF, Peter P, et al. Late complica-
tions and distal growth rates of Marfan aortas afterproximal aortic repair. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg .
2013;44:163 –171.
15.Price J, Magruder JT, Young A, et al. Long-term
outcomes of aortic root operations for Marfan syn-drome: a comparison of Bentall versus aortic valve-sparing procedures. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg .
2016;151:330 –336.
16.Schoenhoff FS, Jungi S, Czerny M, et al. Acute
aortic dissection determines the fate of initially un-
treated aortic segments in Marfan syndrome. Circula-
tion. 2013;127:1569 –1575.
17.Schoenhoff FS, Kadner A, Czerny M, et al. Should
aortic arch replacement be performed during initial
surgery for aortic root aneurysm in patients withMarfan syndrome? Eur J Cardiothorac Surg . 2013;44:
346 –351; discussion 351.
18.Schoenhoff FS, Langhammer B, Wustmann K, et al.
Decision-making in aortic root surgery in Marfan syn-drome: bleeding, thromboembolism and risk of rein-
tervention after valve-sparing or mechanical aortic
root replacement. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg . 2015;48:
931–
935; discussion 935-936.
19.Aftab M, Cikach FS, Zhu Y, et al. Loeys-Dietz syn-
drome: intermediate-term outcomes of medically andsurgically managed patients. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg .
2019;157:439 –450.e5.
20.Patel ND, Crawford T, Magruder JT, et al. Cardio-
vascular operations for Loeys-Dietz syndrome:
intermediate-term results. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg .
2017;153:406 –412.
21.Coselli JS, Hughes MS, Green SY, et al. Valve-
sparing aortic root replacement: early and midtermoutcomes in 83 patients. Ann Thorac Surg . 2014;97:
1267 –1273; discussion 1273-1274.
22.Idrees JJ, Roselli EE, Blackstone EH, et al. Risk of
adding prophylactic aorta replacement to a cardiacoperation. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2020;159:1669 –
1678.e10.
23.Peterss S, Charilaou P, Dumfarth J, et al. Aortic
valve disease with ascending aortic aneurysm: Impact
of concomitant root-sparing (supracoronary) aorticreplacement in nonsyndromic patients. J Thorac Car-
diovasc Surg . 2016;152:791 –798.e1.
24.Rinewalt D, McCarthy PM, Malaisrie SC, et al. Ef-
fect of aortic aneurysm replacement on outcomes afterbicuspid aortic valve surgery: validation of contem-porary guidelines. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2014;148:
2060 –2069.
25.Girdauskas E, Disha K, Raisin HH, et al. Risk of
late aortic events after an isolated aortic valvereplacement for bicuspid aortic valve stenosis withconcomitant ascending aortic dilation. Eur J Car-
diothorac Surg . 2012;42:832 –837; discussion 837-
838.
26.Wallen T, Habertheuer A, Bavaria JE, et al. Elective
aortic root replacement in North America: analysis ofSTS Adult Cardiac Surgery Database. Ann Thorac Surg .
2019;107:1307 –1312.Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e366

6.5.2. Aortic Arch Aneurysms
1.Isselbacher EM. Thoracic and abdominal aortic an-
eurysms. Circulation . 2005;111:816 –828.
2.Coady MA, Rizzo JA, Hammond GL, et al. What is the
appropriate size criterion for resection of thoracicaortic aneurysms? J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 1997;113:
476–491.
3.Erbel R, Aboyans V, Boileau C, et al. 2014 ESC
guidelines on the diagnosis and treatment of aorticdiseases: document covering acute and chronic aorticdiseases of the thoracic and abdominal aorta of theadult. The Task Force for the Diagnosis and Treatmentof Aortic Diseases of the European Society of Cardi-
ology (ESC). Eur Heart J . 2014;35:2873 –2926.
4.Sultan S, Kavanagh EP, Diethrich E, et al. A clinical
review of early outcomes from contemporary ﬂow
modulation versus open, fenestrated and branchtechnologies in the management of thoracoabdominal
aortic aneurysm. Vascular . 2018;26:209 –215.
5.Malaisrie SC, Duncan BF, Mehta CK, et al. The
addition of hemiarch replacement to aortic root sur-gery does not affect safety. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg .
2015;150:118 –124.e2.
6.Shrestha M, Bachet J, Bavaria J, et al. Current status
and recommendations for use of the frozen elephanttrunk technique: a position paper by the VascularDomain of EACTS. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg . 2015;47:
759–769.
7.Hanif H, Dubois L, Ouzounian M, et al. Aortic arch
reconstructive surgery with conventional techniquesvs frozen elephant trunk: a systematic review andmeta-analysis. Can J Cardiol . 2018;34:262 –273.
8.Yuan SM. Hoarseness due to aortic arch aneurysms.
Braz J Cardiovasc Surg . 2020;35:970 –976.
9.Peterson MD, Garg V, Mazer CD, et al. A randomized
trial comparing axillary versus innominate artery can-
nulation for aortic arch surgery. J Thorac Cardiovasc
Surg. 2020. S0022-5223:33143-3.
10.Harky A, Grafton-Clarke C, Hadlett M, et al. In
thoracic aortic surgery, is innominate artery cannula-
tion a safe and effective alternative to axillary arterycannulation? Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg . 2019;29:
604 –607.
11.Preventza O, Price MD, Spiliotopoulos K, et al. In
elective arch surgery with circulatory arrest, does the
arterial cannulation site really matter? A propensityscore analysis of right axillary and innominate arterycannulation. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2018;155:1953 –
1960.e4.
12.Svensson LG, Blackstone EH, Rajeswaran J, et al.
Does the arterial cannulation site for circulatory arrestinﬂuence stroke risk? Ann Thorac Surg. 2004;78:1274 –
1284.
13.Tian WZ, Er JX, Liu L, et al. Effects of autologous
platelet rich plasma on intraoperative transfusion andshort-term outcomes in total arch replacement (Sun ’
s
procedure): a prospective, randomized trial.J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth . 2019;33:2163 –2169.
14.Tian DH, Weller J, Hasmat S, et al. Temperature
selection in antegrade cerebral perfusion for aorticarch surgery: a meta-analysis. Ann Thorac Surg .
2019;108:283 –291.
15.Svensson LG, Blackstone EH, Apperson-Hansen C,
et al. Implications from neurologic assessment of brain
protection for total arch replacement from arandomized trial. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2015;150:
1140 –1147.e11.
16.Regalado ES, Mellor-Crummey L, De BJ, et al.
Clinical history and management recommendations ofthe smooth muscle dysfunction syndrome due toACTA2 arginine 179 alterations. Genet Med . 2018;20:
1206 –1215.
17.MacCarrick G, Black JH 3rd, Bowdin S, et al. Loeys-
Dietz syndrome: a primer for diagnosis and manage-ment. Genet Med . 2014;16:576 –587.
18.Svensson LG, Rushing GD, Valenzuela ES, et al.
Modiﬁcations, classi ﬁcations, and outcomes of
elephant-trunk procedures. Ann Thorac Surg. 2013;96:
548 –558.
19.Czerny M, Schmidli J, Adler S, et al. Current options
and recommendations for the treatment of thoracicaortic pathologies involving the aortic arch: an expert
consensus document of the European Association for
Cardio-Thoracic surgery (EACTS) and the EuropeanSociety for Vascular Surgery (ESVS). Eur J Cardiothorac
Surg. 2019;55:133 –162.
20.Azuma T, Yokoi Y, Yamazaki K. The next generation
of fenestrated endografts: results of a clinical trial tosupport an expanded indication for aortic arch aneu-rysm treatment. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg . 2013;44:
e156 –e163; discussion e163.
21.Furuta A, Azuma T, Yokoi Y, et al. The midterm
results of thoracic endovascular aortic repair with a
precurved fenestrated endograft in zone 0-1. Eur J
Cardiothorac Surg . 2020;58:722 –729.
22.Bavaria J, Vallabhajosyula P, Moeller P, et al.
Hybrid approaches in the treatment of aortic arch an-eurysms: postoperative and midterm outcomes.J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2013;145:S85 –S90.
23.Preventza O, Tan CW, Orozco-Sevilla V, et al. Zone
zero hybrid arch exclusion versus open total archreplacement. Ann Cardiothorac Surg . 2018;7:372 –379.
24.Preventza O, Garcia A, Cooley DA, et al. Total
aortic arch replacement: a comparative study of zone
0 hybrid arch exclusion versus traditional open repair.J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2015;150:1591 –1598; dis-
cussion 1598-1600.
25.Patel R, Sweeting MJ, Powell JT, et al. Endovas-
cular versus open repair of abdominal aortic aneurysm
in 15-years ’follow-up of the UK endovascular aneu-
rysm repair trial 1 (EVAR trial 1): a randomised
controlled trial. Lancet . 2016;388:2366 –2374.
26.Haulon S, Greenberg RK, Spear R, et al. Global
experience with an inner branched arch endograft.
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2014;148:1709 –1716.
6.5.3.1. Size Thresholds for Repair of Descend-
ing TAA
1.Kim JB, Kim K, Lindsay ME, et al. Risk of rupture or
dissection in descending thoracic aortic aneurysm.Circulation . 2015;132:1620 –1629.
2.Davies RR, Goldstein LJ, Coady MA, et al. Yearly
rupture or dissection rates for thoracic aortic aneu-rysms: simple prediction based on size. Ann Thorac
Surg. 2002;73:17 –27; discussion 27-28.
3.Lobato AC, Puech-Leao P. Predictive factors for
rupture of thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm. J Vasc
Surg. 1998;27:446 –453.
4.Juvonen T, Ergin MA, Galla JD, et al. Prospective
study of the natural history of thoracic aortic aneu-rysms. Ann Thorac Surg . 1997;63:1533 –1545.5.Nathan DP, Xu C, Pouch AM, et al. Increased wall
stress of saccular versus fusiform aneurysms of thedescending thoracic aorta. Ann Vasc Surg . 2011;25:
1129 –1137.
6.Oderich GS, Panneton JM, Bower TC, et al. Infected
aortic aneurysms: aggressive presentation, compli-
cated early outcome, but durable results. J Vasc Surg .
2001;34:900 –908.
7.Harris DG, Olson SL, Panthofer AM, et al. A frailty-
based risk score predicts morbidity and mortality afterelective endovascular repair of descending thoracicaortic aneurysms. Ann Vasc Surg . 2020;67:90 –99.
8.Schermerhorn ML, Giles KA, Hamdan AD, et al.
Population-based outcomes of open descendingthoracic aortic aneurysm repair. J Vasc Surg . 2008;48:
821–827.
9.Girardi LN, Leonard JR, Lau C, et al. Gender-related
outcomes after open repair of descending thoracic and
thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms. J Vasc Surg .
2019;69:1028 –1035.e1.
6.5.3.2 Endovascular Versus Open Repair of
Descending TAA
1.Makaroun MS, Dillavou ED, Kee ST, et al. Endovas-
cular treatment of thoracic aortic aneurysms: results ofthe phase II multicenter trial of the GORE TAG thoracic
endoprosthesis. J Vasc Surg . 2005;41:1 –9.
2.Matsumura JS, Cambria RP, Dake MD, et al. Inter-
national controlled clinical trial of thoracic endovas-
cular aneurysm repair with the Zenith TX2endovascular graft: 1-year results. J Vasc Surg .
2008;47:247 –257; discussion 257.
3.Fairman RM, Criado F, Farber M, et al. Pivotal results
of the Medtronic Vascular Talent Thoracic Stent GraftSystem: the VALOR trial. J Vasc Surg . 2008;48:546 –
554.
4.Goodney PP, Travis L, Lucas FL, et al. Survival after
open versus endovascular thoracic aortic aneurysm
repair in an observational study of the Medicare pop-ulation. Circulation . 2011;124:2661 –2669.
5.Lomazzi C, Mascoli C, de Beaufort HWL, et al.
Gender related access complications after TEVAR:analysis from the Retrospective Multicentre CohortGORE/C226GREAT Registry Study. Eur J Vasc Endovasc
Surg. 2020;60:203 –209.
6.Coselli JS, Bozinovski J, LeMaire SA. Open surgical
repair of 2286 thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms.
Ann Thorac Surg . 2007;83:S862 –S864; discussion
S890-S892.
7.Girardi LN, Leonard JR, Lau C, et al. Gender-related
outcomes after open repair of descending thoracic andthoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms. J Vasc Surg .
2019;69:1028 –1035.e1.
8.Estrera AL, Jan A, Sandhu H, et al. Outcomes of
open repair for chronic descending thoracic aorticdissection. Ann Thorac Surg . 2015;99:786 –793; dis-
cussion 794.
9.Pujara AC, Roselli EE, Hernandez AV, et al. Open
repair of chronic distal aortic dissection in the endo-
vascular era: implications for disease management.J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2012;144:866 –873.
10.Matsumura JS, Cambria RP, Dake MD, et al. Inter-
national controlled clinical trial of thoracic endovas-cular aneurysm repair with the Zenith TX2endovascular graft: 1-year results. J Vasc Surg .
2008;47:247 –257; discussion 257.JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee367

11.Fairman AS, Beck AW, Malas MB, et al. Reinter-
ventions in the modern era of thoracic endovascularaortic repair. J Vasc Surg . 2020;71:408 –422.
12.Patel VI, Mukhopadhyay S, Ergul E, et al. Impact of
hospital volume and type on outcomes of open and
endovascular repair of descending thoracic aneurysms
in the United States Medicare population. J Vasc Surg .
2013;58:346 –354.
13.Makaroun MS, Dillavou ED, Wheatley GH, et al.
Five-year results of endovascular treatment with theGore TAG device compared with open repair ofthoracic aortic aneurysms. J Vasc Surg . 2008;47:912 –
918.
14.Coselli JS, LeMaire SA, Preventza O, et al. Out-
comes of 3309 thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm
repairs. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2016;151:1323 –
1337.
15.Patel HJ, Dake MD, Bavaria JE, et al. Branched
endovascular therapy of the distal aortic arch: pre-liminary results of the feasibility multicenter trial ofthe Gore Thoracic Branch Endoprosthesis. Ann Thorac
Surg. 2016;102:1190 –1198.
16.Tong MZ, Eagleton MJ, Roselli EE, et al. Outcomes
of open versus endovascular repair of descendingthoracic and thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms. Ann
Thorac Surg. 2022;113:1144 –1152.
6.5.3.3. Left Subclavian Artery Management
1.Cooper DG, Walsh SR, Sadat U, et al. Neurological
complications after left subclavian artery coverage
during thoracic endovascular aortic repair: a system-
atic review and meta-analysis. J Vasc Surg . 2009;49:
1594 –1601.
2.Buth J, Harris PL, Hobo R, et al. Neurologic com-
plications associated with endovascular repair ofthoracic aortic pathology: Incidence and risk factors. astudy from the European Collaborators on Stent/Graft
Techniques for Aortic Aneurysm Repair (EUROSTAR)
registry. J Vasc Surg . 2007;46:1103 –1110; discussion
1110-1111.
3.Nakamura E, Nakamura K, Furukawa K, et al. Left
subclavian artery revascularization for delayed paral-ysis after thoracic endovascular aortic repair. Ann Vasc
Dis. 2019;12:233 –235.
4.Kotelis D, Geisbusch P, Hinz U, et al. Short and
midterm results after left subclavian artery coverage
during endovascular repair of the thoracic aorta. J Vasc
Surg. 2009;50:1285 –1292.
5.Patel HJ, Dake MD, Bavaria JE, et al. Branched
endovascular therapy of the distal aortic arch: pre-liminary results of the feasibility multicenter trial ofthe Gore Thoracic Branch Endoprosthesis. Ann Thorac
Surg. 2016;102:1190 –1198.
6.Roselli EE, Arko FR 3rd, Thompson MM, et al. Re-
sults of the Valiant Mona LSA early feasibility study for
descending thoracic aneurysms. J Vasc Surg . 2015;62:
1465
–1471.e3.
7.Waterford SD, Chou D, Bombien R, et al. Left sub-
clavian arterial coverage and stroke during thoracicaortic endografting: a systematic review. Ann Thorac
Surg. 2016;101:381 –389.
8.von Allmen RS, Gahl B, Powell JT. Editor ’s
choice –incidence of stroke following thoracic
endovascular aortic repair for descending aorticaneurysm: a systematic review of the literaturewith meta-analysis. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg .
2017;53:176 –184.
9.Woo EY, Carpenter JP, Jackson BM, et al. Left
subclavian artery coverage during thoracic endovas-cular aortic repair: a single-center experience. J Vasc
Surg. 2008;48:555 –560.
10.Rizvi AZ, Murad MH, Fairman RM, et al. The effect
of left subclavian artery coverage on morbidity and
mortality in patients undergoing endovascular thoracicaortic interventions: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Vasc Surg . 2009;50:1159 –1169.
6.5.3.4. Celiac Artery Management
1.Rose MK, Pearce BJ, Matthews TC, et al. Outcomes
after celiac artery coverage during thoracic endovas-
cular aortic aneurysm repair. J Vasc Surg . 2015;62:36 –
42.
2.Vaddineni SK, Taylor SM, Patterson MA, et al.
Outcome after celiac artery coverage during endo-vascular thoracic aortic aneurysm repair: preliminaryresults. J Vasc Surg . 2007;45:467 –471.
3.Mehta M, Darling RC 3rd, Taggert JB, et al. Out-
comes of planned celiac artery coverage duringTEVAR. J Vasc Surg . 2010;52:1153 –1158.
6.5.3.5. Ruptured Descending TAA
1.Jonker FH, Verhagen HJ, Lin PH, et al. Open
surgery versus endovascular repair of ruptured
thoracic aortic aneurysms. J Vasc Surg . 2011;53:
1210 –1216.
2.Jonker FH, Trimarchi S, Verhagen HJ, et al. Meta-
analysis of open versus endovascular repair forruptured descending thoracic aortic aneurysm. J Vasc
Surg. 2010;51:1026 –1032, 1032.e1-1032.e2.
3.Patel HJ, Williams DM, Upchurch GR Jr, et al.
A comparative analysis of open and endovascular
repair for the ruptured descending thoracic aorta.
J Vasc Surg . 2009;50:1265 –1270.
4.Goodney PP, Travis L, Lucas FL, et al. Survival after
open versus endovascular thoracic aortic aneurysmrepair in an observational study of the Medicare pop-ulation. Circulation . 2011;124:2661 –2669.
5.Cambria RP, Crawford RS, Cho JS, et al.
A multicenter clinical trial of endovascular stent graft
repair of acute catastrophes of the descending thoracic
aorta.
J Vasc Surg . 2009;50:1255 –1264. e1-4.
6.Banno H, Ikeda S, Kawai Y, et al. Early and midterm
outcomes of celiac artery coverage during thoracic
endovascular aortic repair. J Vasc Surg . 2020;72:1552 –
1557.
7.Vaddineni SK, Taylor SM, Patterson MA, et al.
Outcome after celiac artery coverage during endo-vascular thoracic aortic aneurysm repair: preliminaryresults. J Vasc Surg . 2007;45:467 –471.
6.5.3.6. Access Issues for TEVAR in Descending
TAA
1.Jackson BM, Woo EY, Bavaria JE, et al. Gender
analysis of the pivotal results of the Medtronic TalentThoracic Stent Graft System (VALOR) trial. J Vasc Surg .
2011;54:358 –363, 363.e1.
2.Lomazzi C, Mascoli C, de Beaufort HWL, et al.
Gender related access complications after TEVAR:
analysis from the Retrospective Multicentre CohortGORE/C226GREAT Registry Study. Eur J Vasc Endovasc
Surg. 2020;60:203 –209.3.Baxter RD, Hansen SK, Gable CE, et al. Outcomes of
open versus percutaneous access for patients enrolledin the GREAT registry. Ann Vasc Surg . 2021;70:370 –
377.
4.Lee WA, Brown MP, Nelson PR, et al. Midterm
outcomes of femoral arteries after percutaneous
endovascular aortic repair using the Preclose tech-nique. J Vasc Surg . 2008;47:919 –923.
5.de Souza LR, Oderich GS, Banga PV, et al. Outcomes
of total percutaneous endovascular aortic repair forthoracic, fenestrated, and branched endografts. J Vasc
Surg. 2015;62:1442 –1449.e3.
6.Makaroun MS, Dillavou ED, Kee ST, et al. Endo-
vascular treatment of thoracic aortic aneurysms:
results of the phase II multicenter trial of the GORETAG thoracic endoprosthesis. J Vasc Surg . 2005;41:
1–9.
7.Matsumura JS, Cambria RP, Dake MD, et al. Inter-
national controlled clinical trial of thoracic endovas-cular aneurysm repair with the Zenith TX2
endovascular graft: 1-year results. J Vasc Surg .
2008;47:247 –257; discussion 257.
8.Fairman RM, Criado F, Farber M, et al. Pivotal re-
sults of the Medtronic Vascular Talent Thoracic StentGraft System: the VALOR trial. J Vasc Surg . 2008;48:
546 –554.
6.5.4.1. Size Thresholds for Open Surgical
Repair of TAAA
1.Kim JB, Kim K, Lindsay ME, et al. Risk of rupture or
dissection in descending thoracic aortic aneurysm.
Circulation . 2015;132:1620 –1629.
2.Davies RR, Goldstein LJ, Coady MA, et al. Yearly
rupture or dissection rates for thoracic aortic aneu-
rysms: simple prediction based on size. Ann Thorac
Surg. 2002;73:17 –27; discussion 27-28.
3.Zafar MA, Chen JF, Wu J, et al. Natural history of
descending thoracic and thoracoabdominal aortic an-eurysms. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2021;161:498 –511.
e1.
4.Lobato AC, Puech-Leao P. Predictive factors for
rupture of thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm. J Vasc
Surg. 1998;27:446 –453.
5.Gambardella I, Gaudino MFL, Rahouma M, et al.
Impact of left ventricular ejection fraction on theoutcomes of open repair of descending thoracic and
thoracoabdominal aneurysms. J Thorac Cardiovasc
Surg. 2021;161:534 –541.e5.
6.Girardi LN, Lau C, Ohmes LB, et al. Open repair
of descending and thoracoabdominal aortic aneu-rysms in octogenarians. JV a s cS u r g . 2018;68:1287 –
1296.e3.
7.Juvonen J, Surcel HM, Satta J, et al. Elevated
circulating levels of in ﬂammatory cytokines in patients
with abdominal aortic aneurysm. Arterioscler Thromb
Vasc Biol . 1997;17:2843 –2847.
8.Elefteriades JA. Natural history of thoracic aortic
aneurysms: indications for surgery, and surgical versus
nonsurgical risks. Ann Thorac Surg . 2002;74:S1877 –
S1880.
6.5.4.2. Open Versus Endovascular Repair of
TAAA
1.Walsh K, O ’Connor DJ, Weaver F, et al. Survival after
endovascular therapy in patients with rupturedthoracic aortic diseases: results from the GlobalIsselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e368

Registry for Endovascular Aortic Treatment Registry.
J Vasc Surg . 2020;72:1544 –1551.
2.Hammo S, Larzon T, Hultgren R, et al. Outcome
after endovascular repair of ruptured descending
thoracic aortic aneurysm: a national multicentre study.Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg . 2019;57:788 –794.
3.Goodney PP, Travis L, Lucas FL, et al. Survival after
open versus endovascular thoracic aortic aneurysm
repair in an observational study of the Medicare pop-ulation. Circulation . 2011;124:2661 –2669.
4.Ogawa Y, Watkins AC, Lingala B, et al. Improved
midterm outcomes after endovascular repair of non-
traumatic descending thoracic aortic rupture compared
with open surgery. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2021;161:
2004 –2012.
5.Gaudino M, Lau C, Munjal M, et al. Open repair of
ruptured descending thoracic and thoracoabdominal
aortic aneurysms. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2015;150:
814–821.
6.Clough RE, Martin-Gonzalez T, Van Calster K, et al.
Endovascular repair of thoracoabdominal and archaneurysms in patients with connective tissue disease
using branched and fenestrated devices. Ann Vasc
Surg. 2017;44:158 –163.
7.Pacini D, Parolari A, Berretta P, et al. Endovascular
treatment for type B dissection in Marfan syndrome: isit worthwhile? Ann Thorac Surg . 2013;95:737 –749.
8.Coselli JS, Green SY, Price MD, et al. Results of open
surgical repair in patients with Marfan syndrome anddistal aortic dissection. Ann Thorac Surg . 2016;101:
2193 –2201.
9.Waterford SD, Gardner RL, Moon MR. Extent of
aortic replacement in type A dissection: current an-swers for an endless debate. Ann Thorac Surg .
2018;106:1246 –1250.
10.Aucoin VJ, Eagleton MJ, Farber MA, et al. Spinal
cord protection practices used during endovascularrepair of complex aortic aneurysms by the U.S. AorticResearch Consortium. J Vasc Surg . 2021;73:323 –330.
11.Scali ST, Kim M, Kubilis P, et al. Implementation of
a bundled protocol signi ﬁcantly reduces risk of spinal
cord ischemia after branched or fenestrated endovas-cular aortic repair. J Vasc Surg . 2018;67:409 –423.e4.
12.Banga PV, Oderich GS, Reis de Souza L, et al.
Neuromonitoring, cerebrospinal ﬂuid drainage, and
selective use of iliofemoral conduits to minimize risk ofspinal cord injury during complex endovascular aorticrepair. J Endovasc Ther . 2016;23:139 –149.
13.Oderich GS, Tenorio ER, Mendes BC, et al. Midterm
outcomes of a prospective, nonrandomized study to
evaluate endovascular repair of complex aortic aneu-
rysms using fenestrated-branched endografts. Ann
Surg. 2021;274:491 –499.
14.Kolbel T, Spanos K, Jama K, et al. Early outcomes
of the t-Branch off-the-shelf multi-branched stent
graft in 542 patients for elective and urgent aorticpathologies –a retrospective observational study.
J Vasc Surg . 2021. S0741-5214:00916-2.
15.Eagleton MJ, Follansbee M, Wolski K, et al.
Fenestrated and branched endovascular aneurysm
repair outcomes for type II and III thoracoabdominalaortic aneurysms. J Vasc Surg . 2016;63:930 –942.
6.5.4.3. TAAA Spinal Cord Protection
1.Coselli JS, LeMaire SA, Preventza O, et al. Out-
comes of 3309 thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysmrepairs. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2016;151:1323 –
1337.
2.Coselli JS, LeMaire SA, Koksoy C, et al. Cerebrospi-
nalﬂuid drainage reduces paraplegia after thor-
acoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair: results of arandomized clinical trial. J Vasc Surg . 2002;35:631 –
639.
3.Girardi LN, Lau C, Ohmes LB, et al. Open repair of
descending and thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms inoctogenarians. J Vasc Surg . 2018;68:1287 –1296.e3.
4.Khan FM, Naik A, Hameed I, et al. Open repair of
descending thoracic and thoracoabdominal aortic an-eurysms: a meta-analysis. Ann Thorac Surg . 2020;110:
1941 –1949.
5.Estrera AL, Miller CC 3rd, Huynh TT, et al. Neuro-
logic outcome after thoracic and thoracoabdominalaortic aneurysm repair. Ann Thorac Surg . 2001;72:
1225 –1230; discussion 1230-1231.
6.Wong CS, Healy D, Canning C, et al. A systematic
review of spinal cord injury and cerebrospinal ﬂuid
drainage after thoracic aortic endografting. J Vasc
Surg. 2012;56:1438 –1447.
7.Wynn MM, Sebranek J, Marks E, et al. Complications
of spinal ﬂuid drainage in thoracic and thor-
acoabdominal aortic aneurysm surgery in 724 patientstreated from 1987 to 2013. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth .
2015;29:342 –350.
8.Sandhu HK, Evans JD, Tanaka A, et al. Fluctuations
in spinal cord perfusion pressure: a harbinger of
delayed paraplegia after thoracoabdominal aorticrepair. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2017;29:451 –
459.
9.Hiratzka LF, Bakris GL, Beckman JA, et al. 2010
ACCF/AHA/AATS/ACR/ASA/SCA/SCAI/SIR/STS/SVMguidelines for the diagnosis and management of pa-tients with thoracic aortic disease: a report of theAmerican College of Cardiology Foundation/American
Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines,
American Association for Thoracic Surgery, AmericanCollege of Radiology, American Stroke Association,Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists, Societyfor Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions,Society of Interventional Radiology, Society of
Thoracic Surgeons, and Society for Vascular Medicine.
J Am Coll Cardiol . 2010;55:e27 –e129.
10.Erbel R, Aboyans V, Boileau C, et al. 2014 ESC
guidelines on the diagnosis and treatment of aorticdiseases: document covering acute and chronic aorticdiseases of the thoracic and abdominal aorta of theadult. The Task Force for the Diagnosis and Treatmentof Aortic Diseases of the European Society of Cardi-
ology (ESC). Eur Heart J . 2014;35:2873 –2926.
11.Crawford ES, Svensson LG, Hess KR, et al.
A prospective randomized study of cerebrospinal ﬂuid
drainage to prevent paraplegia after high-risk surgeryon the thoracoabdominal aorta. J Vasc Surg . 1991;13:
36–45; discussion 45-46.
12.Chatterjee S, Casar JG, LeMaire SA, et al. Periop-
erative care after thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysmrepair: The Baylor College of Medicine experience. Part2: postoperative management. J Thorac Cardiovasc
Surg. 2021;161:699 –705.
13.Lima B, Nowicki ER, Blackstone EH, et al. Spinal
cord protective strategies during descending andthoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair in the mod-ern era: the role of intrathecal papaverine. J Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg . 2012;143:945 –952.e941.14.Estrera AL, Miller CC 3rd, Huynh TT, et al. Preop-
erative and operative predictors of delayed neurologicdeﬁcit following repair of thoracoabdominal aortic
aneurysm. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2003;126:1288 –
1294.
6.5.4.4. TAAA Renal and Visceral Organ
Protection
1.Moulakakis KG, Karaolanis G, Antonopoulos CN,
et al. Open repair of thoracoabdominal aortic aneu-rysms in experienced centers. J Vasc Surg . 2018;68:
634 –645.e612.
2.Coselli JS, LeMaire SA, Preventza O, et al. Outcomes
of 3309 thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repairs.J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2016;151:1323 –1337.
3.Murana G, Castrovinci S, Kloppenburg G, et al.
Open thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair in themodern era: results from a 20-year single-centreexperience. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg . 2016;49:1374 –
1381.
4.Khan FM, Naik A, Hameed I, et al. Open repair of
descending thoracic and thoracoabdominal aortic an-eurysms: a meta-analysis. Ann Thorac Surg . 2020;110:
1941 –1949.
5.Lemaire SA, Jones MM, Conklin LD, et al. Random-
ized comparison of cold blood and cold crystalloidrenal perfusion for renal protection during thor-acoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair. J Vasc Surg .
2009;49:11 –19; discussion 19.
6.Koksoy C, LeMaire SA, Curling PE, et al. Renal
perfusion during thoracoabdominal aortic operations:cold crystalloid is superior to normothermic blood. Ann
Thorac Surg . 2002;73:730 –738.
7.Svensson LG, Crawford ES, Hess KR, et al. Thor-
acoabdominal aortic aneurysms associated with celiac,superior mesenteric, and renal artery occlusive disease:
methods and analysis of results in 271 patients. J Vasc
Surg. 1992;16:378 –389; discussion 389-390.
6.5.5.1. Access During Endovascular Repair of
AAA
1.Vierhout BP, Pol RA, Ott MA, et al. Randomized
multicenter trial on percutaneous versus open accessin endovascular aneurysm repair (PiERO). J Vasc Surg .
2019;69:1429 –1436.
2.Siracuse JJ, Farber A, Kalish JA, et al. Comparison of
access type on perioperative outcomes after endo-vascular aortic aneurysm repair. J Vasc Surg . 2018;68:
91–99.
3.Nelson PR, Kracjer Z, Kansal N, et al. A multicenter,
randomized, controlled trial of totally percutaneousaccess versus open femoral exposure for endovascular
aortic aneurysm repair (the PEVAR trial). J Vasc Surg .
2014;59:1181 –1193.
4.Kalish J, Eslami M, Gillespie D, et al. Routine use of
ultrasound guidance in femoral arterial access for pe-
ripheral vascular intervention decreases groin hema-
toma rates. J Vasc Surg . 2015;61:1231 –1238.
6.5.5.2. Repair of Ruptured AAA
1.Starnes BW, Quiroga E, Hutter C, et al. Management
of ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm in the endo-vascular era. J Vasc Surg . 2010;51:9 –17; discussion 17-
18.
2.Powell JT, Sweeting MJ, Thompson MM, et al.
Endovascular or open repair strategy for rupturedJACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee369

abdominal aortic aneurysm: 30 day outcomes from
IMPROVE randomised trial. BMJ. 2014;348:f7661.
3.Mehta M, Taggert J, Darling RC 3rd, et al. Estab-
lishing a protocol for endovascular treatment of
ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysms: outcomes of aprospective analysis. J Vasc Surg . 2006;44:1 –8; dis-
cussion 8.
4.Kontopodis N, Galanakis N, Antoniou SA, et al.
Meta-analysis and meta-regression analysis of out-comes of endovascular and open repair for rupturedabdominal aortic aneurysm. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg .
2020;59:399 –410.
5.Tan TW, Eslami M, Rybin D, et al. Outcomes of
endovascular and open surgical repair of rupturedabdominal aortic aneurysms in elderly patients. J Vasc
Surg. 2017;66:64 –70.
6.Wang LJ, Locham S, Al-Nouri O, et al. Endovascular
repair of ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm is su-
perior to open repair: propensity-matched analysis inthe Vascular Quality Initiative. J Vasc Surg . 2020;72:
498 –507.
7.Powell JT, Hinchliffe RJ, Thompson MM, et al. Ob-
servations from the IMPROVE trial concerning the
clinical care of patients with ruptured abdominal aorticaneurysm. Br J Surg . 2014;101:216 –224; discussion
224.
8.Faizer R, Weinhandl E, El Hag S, et al. Decreased
mortality with local versus general anesthesia in
endovascular aneurysm repair for ruptured abdominalaortic aneurysm in the Vascular Quality Initiativedatabase. J Vasc Surg . 2019;70:92 –101.e101.
9.Mouton R, Rogers CA, Harris RA, et al. Local
anaesthesia for endovascular repair of rupturedabdominal aortic aneurysm. Br J Surg . 2019;106:74 –81.
10.Veith FJ, Ohki T, Lipsitz EC, et al. Endovascular
grafts and other catheter-directed techniques in the
management of ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysms.
Semin Vasc Surg . 2003;16:326 –331.
11.Bickell WH, Wall MJ Jr, Pepe PE, et al. Immediate
versus delayed ﬂuid resuscitation for hypotensive pa-
tients with penetrating torso injuries. N Engl J Med .
1994;331:1105 –1109.
12.Hambly PR, Dutton RP. Excess mortality associated
with the use of a rapid infusion system at a level 1trauma center. Resuscitation . 1996;31:127 –133.
13.Hoornweg LL, Storm-Versloot MN, Ubbink DT,
et al. Meta analysis on mortality of ruptured abdominalaortic aneurysms. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg . 2008;35:
558–570.
14.Reimerink JJ, Hoornweg LL, Vahl AC, et al. Endo-
vascular repair versus open repair of rupturedabdominal aortic aneurysms: a multicenter randomizedcontrolled trial. Ann Surg . 2013;258:248
–256.
15.Desgranges P, Kobeiter H, Katsahian S, et al. Edi-
tor’s choice - ECAR (Endovasculaire ou Chirurgie dans
les Anévrysmes aorto-iliaques Rompus): a Frenchrandomized controlled trial of endovascular versusopen surgical repair of ruptured aorto-iliac aneurysms.Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg . 2015;50:303 –310.
16.IMPROVE Trial Investigators. Comparative clinical
effectiveness and cost effectiveness of endovascularstrategy v open repair for ruptured abdominal aorticaneurysm: three year results of the IMPROVE rando-mised trial. BMJ. 2017;359:j4859.
17.Varkevisser RRB, Swerdlow NJ, de Guerre L, et al.
Five-year survival following endovascular repair ofruptured abdominal aortic aneurysms is improving.
J Vasc Surg . 2020;72:105 –113.e4.
18.Baderkhan H, Goncalves FM, Oliveira NG, et al.
Challenging anatomy predicts mortality and compli-cations after endovascular treatment of rupturedabdominal aortic aneurysm. J Endovasc Ther . 2016;23:
919–927.
19.Zarkowsky DS, Sorber R, Ramirez JL, et al. Aortic
neck IFU violations during EVAR for ruptured infrarenalaortic aneurysms are associated with increased in-hospital mortality. Ann Vasc Surg . 2021;75:12 –21.
20.Runciman WB, Skowronski GA. Pathophysiology of
haemorrhagic shock. Anaesth Intensive Care . 1984;12:
193–205.
21.Henry X, Verhaeghe P, Canarelli JP, et al. [General
anesthesia in rabbits for digestive surgical research. Aspontaneous ventilation technic by Nembutal-
diazepam combination]. J Chir (Paris) . 1977;113:437 –
440.
22.Hug CC Jr, McLeskey CH, Nahrwold ML, et al.
Hemodynamic effects of propofol: data from over 25,000 patients. Anesth Analg . 1993;77(suppl 4):S21 –
S29.
23.Crosby ET, Miller DR, Hamilton PP, et al.
A randomized double-blind comparison of fentanyl-and sufentanil-oxygen anesthesia for abdominal aorticsurgery. J Cardiothorac Anesth . 1990;4:168 –176.
24.Schneemilch CE, Schilling T, Bank U. Effects of
general anaesthesia on in ﬂammation. Best Pract Res
Clin Anaesthesiol . 2004;18:493 –507.
25.Lenhardt R. The effect of anesthesia on body
temperature control. Front Biosci (Schol Ed) . 2010;2:
1145 –1154.
6.5.5.3. Threshold for AAA Repair
1.Lederle FA, Wilson SE, Johnson GR, et al. Im-
mediate repair compared with surveillance of smallabdominal aortic aneurysms. NE n g lJM e d .
2002;346:1437 –1444.
2.The UK Small Aneurysm Trial Participants. Mortality
results for randomised controlled trial of early elective
surgery or ultrasonographic surveillance for smallabdominal aortic aneurysms. Lancet
. 1998;352:1649 –
1655.
3.Powell JT, Brady AR, Brown LC, et al. Long-term
outcomes of immediate repair compared with surveil-lance of small abdominal aortic aneurysms. N Engl J
Med. 2002;346:1445 –1452.
4.Cao P, De Rango P, Verzini F, et al. Comparison of
surveillance versus aortic endografting for small
aneurysm repair (CAESAR): results from a randomisedtrial. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg . 2011;41:13 –25.
5.Ouriel K, Clair DG, Kent KC, et al. Endovascular
repair compared with surveillance for patients withsmall abdominal aortic aneurysms. J Vasc Surg .
2010;51:1081 –1087.
6.Brown LC, Powell JT, UK Small Aneurysm Trial
Participants, et al. Risk factors for aneurysmrupture in patients kept under ultrasound surveil-
lance. Ann Surg . 1999;230:289 –296; discussion
296-297.
7.Soden PA, Zettervall SL, Ultee KH, et al. Outcomes
for symptomatic abdominal aortic aneurysms in the
American College of Surgeons National Surgical Qual-
ity Improvement Program. J Vasc Surg . 2016;64:297 –
305.8.De Martino RR, Nolan BW, Goodney PP, et al. Out-
comes of symptomatic abdominal aortic aneurysmrepair. J Vasc Surg . 2010;52:5 –12.e1.
9.Karthaus EG, Tong TML, Vahl A, et al. Saccular
abdominal aortic aneurysms: patient characteristics,clinical presentation, treatment, and outcomes in the
Netherlands. Ann Surg . 2019;270:852 –858.
10.Brewster DC, Cronenwett JL, Hallett JW Jr, et al.
Guidelines for the treatment of abdominal aortic an-eurysms. Report of a subcommittee of the JointCouncil of the American Association for Vascular Sur-gery and Society for Vascular Surgery. J Vasc Surg .
2003;37:1106 –1117.
11.Sweeting MJ, Thompson SG, Brown LC, et al. Meta-
analysis of individual patient data to examine factorsaffecting growth and rupture of small abdominal aortic
aneurysms. Br J Surg . 2012;99:655 –665.
12.Lo RC, Lu B, Fokkema MT, et al. Relative impor-
tance of aneurysm diameter and body size for pre-dicting abdominal aortic aneurysm rupture in men andwomen. J Vasc Surg . 2014;59:1209 –1216.
13.Tambyraja AL, Raza Z, Stuart WP, et al. Does im-
mediate operation for symptomatic non-rupturedabdominal aortic aneurysm compromise outcome?Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg . 2004;28:543 –546.
14.Cambria RA, Gloviczki P, Stanson AW, et al.
Symptomatic, nonruptured abdominal aortic aneu-
rysms: are emergent operations necessary? Ann Vasc
Surg. 1994;8:121 –126.
15.Abdulrasak M, Sonesson BJ, Vaccarino R, et al.
Endovascular aneurysm repair for symptomatic
abdominal aortic aneurysms has comparable results toelective repair in the long term. J Vasc Surg . 2020;72:
1927 –1937.e1921.
16.Chaikof EL, Dalman RL, Eskandari MK, et al. The
Society for Vascular Surgery practice guidelines on thecare of patients with an abdominal aortic aneurysm.
J Vasc Surg . 2018;67:2 –77.e72.
17.Tanaka A, Leonard SD, Sandhu HK, et al. Open
descending and thoracoabdominal aortic repairs inpatients younger than 50 years old. Ann Thorac Surg .
2019;108:693 –699.
18.Ameli-Renani S, Das R, Morgan RA. Thoracic
endovascular aortic repair for the treatment of aorticdissection: post-operative imaging, complications andsecondary interventions. Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol .
2015;38:1391 –1404.
6.5.5.4. Open Versus Endovascular Repair of
AAA
1.De Bruin JL, Baas AF, Buth J, et al. Long-term
outcome of open or endovascular repair of abdominal
aortic aneurysm. N Engl J Med . 2010;362:1881 –1889.
2.Becquemin JP, Pillet JC, Lescalie F, et al.
A randomized controlled trial of endovascular aneu-rysm repair versus open surgery for abdominal aorticaneurysms in low- to moderate-risk patients. J Vasc
Surg. 2011;53:1167 –1173.e1161.
3.Lederle FA, Freischlag JA, Kyriakides TC, et al.
Outcomes following endovascular vs open repair of
abdominal aortic aneurysm: a randomized trial. JAMA .
2009;302:1535 –1542.
4.Lederle FA, Freischlag JA, Kyriakides TC, et al.
Long-term comparison of endovascular and open
repair of abdominal aortic aneurysm. N Engl J Med .
2012;367:1988 –1997.Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e370

5.Lederle FA, Kyriakides TC, Stroupe KT, et al. Open
versus endovascular repair of abdominal aortic aneu-rysm. N Engl J Med . 2019;380:2126 –2135.
6.EVAR Trial Participants. Endovascular aneurysm
repair versus open repair in patients with abdominalaortic aneurysm (EVAR trial 1): randomised controlled
trial. Lancet . 2005;365:2179 –2186.
7.United Kingdom EVAR Trial Investigators,
Greenhalgh RM, Brown LC, et al. Endovascular versusopen repair of abdominal aortic aneurysm. N Engl J
Med. 2010;362:1863 –1871.
8.Patel R, Sweeting MJ, Powell JT, et al. Endo-
vascular versus open repair of abdominal aorticaneurysm in 15-years ’follow-up of the UK endo-
vascular aneurysm repair trial 1 (EVAR trial 1): arandomised controlled trial. Lancet . 2016;388:
2366 –2374.
9.Schermerhorn ML, O ’Malley AJ, Jhaveri A, et al.
Endovascular vs. open repair of abdominal aortic an-eurysms in the Medicare population. N Engl J Med .
2008;358:464 –474.
10.Varkevisser RRB, O ’Donnell TFX, Swerdlow NJ,
et al. Fenestrated endovascular aneurysm repair isassociated with lower perioperative morbidity andmortality compared with open repair for complex
abdominal aortic aneurysms. J Vasc Surg . 2019;69:
1670 –1678.
11.Rao R, Lane TR, Franklin IJ, et al. Open repair versus
fenestrated endovascular aneurysm repair of juxtare-nal aneurysms. J Vasc Surg . 2015;61:242 –255.
12.Schanzer A, Greenberg RK, Hevelone N, et al.
Predictors of abdominal aortic aneurysm sac enlarge-ment after endovascular repair. Circulation . 2011;123:
2848 –2855.
13.Herman CR, Charbonneau P, Hongku K, et al. Any
nonadherence to instructions for use predicts graft-related adverse events in patients undergoing elec-
tive endovascular aneurysm repair. J Vasc Surg .
2018;67:126 –133.
14.Antoniou GA, Juszczak MT, Nasr H, et al. Prognosis
review and time-to-event data meta-analysis ofendovascular aneurysm repair outside versus withininstructions for use of aortic endograft devices. J Vasc
Surg. 2020;71:1415 –1431.e1415.
15.Walker J, Tucker LY, Goodney P, et al. Adherence
to endovascular aortic aneurysm repair device in-structions for use guidelines has no impact on out-comes. J Vasc Surg . 2015;61:1151 –1159.
16.Beckerman WE, Tadros RO, Faries PL, et al. No
major difference in outcomes for endovascular aneu-rysm repair stent grafts placed outside of instructionsfor use. J Vasc Surg . 2016;64:63 –74.e62.
17.O’Donnell TFX, Boitano LT, Deery SE, et al. Open
versus fenestrated endovascular repair of complexabdominal aortic aneurysms. Ann Surg . 2020;271:969 –
977.
18.Jones AD, Waduud MA, Walker P, et al. Meta-
analysis of fenestrated endovascular aneurysm repair
versus open surgical repair of juxtarenal abdominalaortic aneurysms over the last 10 years. BJS Open .
2019;3:572 –584.
19.Dubost C, Allary M, Oeconomos N. Resection of an
aneurysm of the abdominal aorta: reestablishment ofthe continuity by a preserved human arterial graft,
with result after ﬁve months. AMA Arch Surg . 1952;64:
405 –408.20.Varkevisser RRB, Swerdlow NJ, de Guerre L, et al.
Five-year survival following endovascular repair ofruptured abdominal aortic aneurysms is improving.J Vasc Surg . 2020;72:105 –113.e4.
21.Li B, Khan S, Salata K, et al. A systematic review
and meta-analysis of the long-term outcomes of
endovascular versus open repair of abdominal aortic
aneurysm. J Vasc Surg . 2019;70:954 –969.e930.
22.Antoniou GA, Antoniou SA, Torella F. Editor ’s
choice —endovascular vs. open repair for abdominal
aortic aneurysm: systematic review and meta-analysisof updated peri-operative and long term data ofrandomised controlled trials. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg .
2020;59:385 –397.
23.Brown LC, Epstein D, Manca A, et al. The UK
Endovascular Aneurysm Repair (EVAR) trials: design,
methodology and progress. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg .
2004;27:372 –381.
24.EVAR trial participants. Endovascular aneurysm
repair and outcome in patients un ﬁt for open repair of
abdominal aortic aneurysm (EVAR trial 2): randomisedcontrolled trial. Lancet . 2005;365:2187 –2192.
25.Sweeting MJ, Patel R, Powell JT, et al. Endovas-
cular repair of abdominal aortic aneurysm in patientsphysically ineligible for open repair: very long-term
follow-up in the EVAR-2 randomized controlled trial.
Ann Surg . 2017;266:713 –719.
26.Adkar SS, Turner MC, Leraas HJ, et al. Low mor-
tality rates after endovascular aortic repair expand useto high-risk patients. J Vasc Surg . 2018;67:424 –432.
e421.
27.Bertges DJ, Neal D, Schanzer A, et al. The Vascular
Quality Initiative Cardiac Risk Index for prediction ofmyocardial infarction after vascular surgery. J Vasc
Surg. 2016;64:1411 –1421.e4.
28.
Eslami MH, Rybin D, Doros G, et al. Comparison
of a Vascular Study Group of New England risk
prediction model with established risk prediction
models of in-hospital mortality after electiveabdominal aortic aneurysm repair. J Vasc Surg .
2015;62:1125 –1133.e1122.
29.Eslami MH, Rybin DV, Doros G, et al. External
validation of Vascular Study Group of New Englandrisk predictive model of mortality after electiveabdominal aorta aneurysm repair in the Vascular
Quality Initiative and comparison against established
models. J Vasc Surg . 2018;67:143 –150.
6.5.5.5. Treatment of Concomitant Common
Iliac Aneurysms
1.Richards T, Dharmadasa A, Davies R, et al. Natural
history of the common iliac artery in the presence of anabdominal aortic aneurysm. J Vasc Surg . 2009;49:
881–885.
2.Armon MP, Wenham PW, Whitaker SC, et al. Com-
mon iliac artery aneurysms in patients with abdominal
aortic aneurysms. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg . 1998;15:
255–257.
3.Jalalzadeh H, Indrakusuma R, Koelemay MJW, et al.
Editor ’s choice –nationwide analysis of patients un-
dergoing iliac artery aneurysm repair in the
Netherlands. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg . 2020;60:49 –
55.
4.Gibello L, Varetto G, Ruf ﬁno MA, et al. Long term
outcomes of endovascular aortic repair in patients withabdominal aortic aneurysm and ectatic common iliacarteries. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg . 2020;60:356 –364.5.Kouvelos GN, Katsargyris A, Antoniou GA, et al.
Outcome after interruption or preservation of internaliliac artery ﬂow during endovascular repair of
abdominal aorto-iliac aneurysms. Eur J Vasc Endovasc
Surg. 2016;52:621 –634.
6.Bosanquet DC, Wilcox C, Whitehurst L, et al. Sys-
tematic review and meta-analysis of the effect of in-ternal iliac artery exclusion for patients undergoingEVAR. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg . 2017;53:534 –548.
7.Laine MT, Bjorck M, Beiles CB, et al. Few internal
iliac artery aneurysms rupture under 4 cm. J Vasc Surg .
2017;65:76 –81.
8.Huang Y, Gloviczki P, Duncan AA, et al. Common
iliac artery aneurysm: expansion rate and results of
open surgical and endovascular repair. J Vasc Surg .
2008;47:1203 –1210; discussion 1210-1211.
9.Sala F, Hassen-Khodja R, Branchereau P, et al.
Outcome of common iliac arteries after aortoaorticgraft placement during elective repair of infrarenalabdominal aortic aneurysms. J Vasc Surg . 2002;36:
982 –
987.
10.Hassen-Khodja R, Feugier P, Favre JP, et al.
Outcome of common iliac arteries after straight aortic
tube-graft placement during elective repair ofinfrarenal abdominal aortic aneurysms. J Vasc Surg .
2006;44:943 –948.
6.5.6.1. Surveillance After TAA Repair
1.Meena RA, Benarroch-Gampel J, Leshnower BG,
et al. Surveillance recommendations after thoracic
endovascular aortic repair should be based on initial
indication for repair. Ann Vasc Surg . 2019;57:51 –59.
2.Bavaria JE, Appoo JJ, Makaroun MS, et al. Endo-
vascular stent grafting versus open surgical repair ofdescending thoracic aortic aneurysms in low-risk pa-tients: a multicenter comparative trial. J Thorac Car-
diovasc Surg . 2007;133:369 –377.
3.Ranney DN, Cox ML, Yerokun BA, et al. Long-term
results of endovascular repair for descending thoracic
aortic aneurysms. J Vasc Surg . 2018;67:363 –368.
4.von Allmen RS, Anjum A, Powell JT. Outcomes after
endovascular or open repair for degenerativedescending thoracic aortic aneurysm using linkedhospital data. Br J Surg . 2014;101:1244 –1251.
5.Roselli EE, Subramanian S, Sun Z, et al. Endovas-
cular versus open elephant trunk completion for
extensive aortic disease. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg .
2013;146:1408 –1416; discussion 1416-1417.
6.Daye D, Walker TG. Complications of endovascular
aneurysm repair of the thoracic and abdominal aorta:evaluation and management. Cardiovasc Diagn Ther .
2018;8:S138 –S156.
7.Ameli-Renani S, Das R, Morgan RA. Thoracic endo-
vascular aortic repair for the treatment of aorticdissection: post-operative imaging, complications and
secondary interventions. Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol .
2015;38:1391 –1404.
8.Hellinger JC. Endovascular repair of thoracic and
abdominal aortic aneurysms: pre- and postprocedural
imaging. Tech Vasc Interv Radiol . 2005;8:2 –15.
9.Weigel S, Tombach B, Maintz D, et al. Thoracic
aortic stent graft: comparison of contrast-enhancedMR angiography and CT angiography in the follow-
up: initial results. Eur Radiol . 2003;13:1628 –1634.
10.Tanaka A, Leonard SD, Sandhu HK, et al. Open
descending and thoracoabdominal aortic repairs inJACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee371

patients younger than 50 years old. Ann Thorac Surg .
2019;108:693 –699.
11.Schaffer JM, Lingala B, Fischbein MP, et al.
Midterm outcomes of open descending thoracic aortic
repair in more than 5,000 Medicare patients. Ann
Thorac Surg . 2015;100:2087 –2094; discussion 2094.
12.Sadek M, Abjigitova D, Pellet Y, et al. Operative
outcomes after open repair of descending thoracic
aortic aneurysms in the era of endovascular surgery.
Ann Thorac Surg . 2014;97:1562 –1567.
13.Peterss S, Charilaou P, Dumfarth J, et al. Aortic
valve disease with ascending aortic aneurysm: Impactof concomitant root-sparing (supracoronary) aortic
replacement in nonsyndromic patients. J Thorac Car-
diovasc Surg . 2016;152:791 –798.e1.
14.Gaudino M, Lau C, Munjal M, et al. Contemporary
outcomes of surgery for aortic root aneurysms: apropensity-matched comparison of valve-sparing and
composite valve graft replacement. J Thorac Car-
diovasc Surg . 2015;150:1120 –1129.e1.
15.Wang TKM, Desai MY. Thoracic aortic aneurysm:
optimal surveillance and treatment. Cleve Clin J Med .
2020;87:557 –568.
16.Groner LK, Lau C, Devereux RB, et al. Imaging of
the postsurgical aorta in Marfan syndrome. Curr Treat
Options Cardiovasc Med . 2018;20:80.
17.Makaroun MS, Dillavou ED, Wheatley GH, et al. Five-
year results of endovascular treatment with the Gore
TAG device compared with open repair of thoracic aorticaneurysms. J Vasc Surg . 2008;47:912 –918.
18.Chen SW, Chan YH, Lin CP, et al. Association of
long-term use of antihypertensive medications with
late outcomes among patients with aortic dissection.
JAMA Netw Open . 2021;4:e210469.
19.Hill RA. Do short-term changes in white matter
structure indicate learning-induced myelin plasticity?J Neurosci . 2013;33:19393 –19395.
6.5.6.2. Surveillance After AAA Repair
1.Sternbergh WC 3rd, Greenberg RK, Chuter TA, et al.
Redeﬁning postoperative surveillance after endovas-
cular aneurysm repair: recommendations based on 5-
year follow-up in the US Zenith multicenter trial.
J Vasc Surg . 2008;48:278 –284; discussion 84-85.
2.Go AS, Magid DJ, Wells B, et al. The cardiovascular
research network: a new paradigm for cardiovascular
quality and outcomes research. Circ Cardiovasc Qual
Outcomes . 2008;1:138 –147.
3.Schermerhorn ML, Buck DB, O ’Malley AJ, et al. Long-
Term Outcomes of Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm in the
Medicare Population. N Engl J Med . 2015;373:328 –338.
4.Go MR, Barbato JE, Rhee RY, et al. What is the
clinical utility of a 6-month computed tomography inthe follow-up of endovascular aneurysm repair pa-tients? J Vasc Surg . 2008;47:1181 –1186; discussion
1186-1187.
5.Mii S, Mori A, Sakata H, et al. Para-anastomotic an-
eurysms: incidence, risk factors, treatment and prog-nosis. J Cardiovasc Surg (Torino) . 1998;39:259 –266.
6.Edwards JM, Teefey SA, Zierler RE, et al. Intra-
abdominal paraanastomotic aneurysms after aorticbypass grafting. J Vasc Surg . 1992;15:344 –350; dis-
cussion 351-353.
7.Fransen GA, Desgranges P, Laheij RJ, et al. Fre-
quency, predictive factors, and consequences of stent-graft kink following endovascular AAA repair.
J Endovasc Ther . 2003;10:913 –918.
8.Tonnessen BH, Sternbergh WC 3rd, Money SR. Mid-
and long-term device migration after endovascularabdominal aortic aneurysm repair: a comparison of
AneuRx and Zenith endografts. J Vasc Surg . 2005;42:
392–400; discussion 400-401.
9.Iscan HZ, Unal EU, Akkaya B, et al. Color Doppler
ultrasound for surveillance following EVAR as theprimary tool. J Card Surg . 2021;36:111 –117.
10.Swerdlow NJ, McCallum JC, Liang P, et al. Select
type I and type III endoleaks at the completion of
fenestrated endovascular aneurysm repair resolve
spontaneously. J Vasc Surg . 2019;70:381 –390.
11.Tran K, McFarland G, Sgroi M, et al. Duplex ultra-
sound surveillance of renal branch grafts after fenes-trated endovascular aneurysm repair. J Vasc Surg .
2019;70:1048 –1055.
12.Noll RE Jr, Tonnessen BH, Mannava K, et al. Long-
term postplacement cost after endovascular aneurysm
repair. J Vasc Surg . 2007;46:9 –15; discussion 15.
13.Brenner DJ, Hall EJ. Computed tomography –an
increasing source of radiation exposure. N Engl J Med .
2007;357:2277 –2284.
14.Johnsen L, Hisdal J, Jonung T, et al. Contrast-
enhanced ultrasound detects type II endoleaks duringfollow-up for endovascular aneurysm repair. J Vasc
Surg. 2020;72:1952 –1959.
15.George J, Tadros RO, Rao A, et al. Duplex ultra-
sound can successfully identify endoleaks and reno-visceral stent patency in patients undergoing complex
endovascular aneurysm repair. Vasc Endovascular Surg .
2021;55:234 –238.
16.Kawada H, Goshima S, Sakurai K, et al. Utility of
noncontrast magnetic resonance angiography foraneurysm follow-up and detection of endoleaks afterendovascular aortic repair. Korean J Radiol . 2021;22:
513–524.
17.Allen RC, Schneider J, Longenecker L, et al. Para-
anastomotic aneurysms of the abdominal aorta. J Vasc
Surg. 1993;18:424 –431; discussion 431-432.
18.Conrad MF, Crawford RS, Pedraza JD, et al. Long-
term durability of open abdominal aortic aneurysmrepair. J Vasc Surg . 2007;46:669 –675.
19.Dingemans SA, Jonker FH, Moll FL, et al. Aneurysm
sac enlargement after endovascular abdominal aortic
aneurysm repair. Ann Vasc Surg . 2016;31:229 –238.
20.Candell L, Tucker LY, Goodney P, et al. Early and
delayed rupture after endovascular abdominal aorticaneurysm repair in a 10-year multicenter registry.J Vasc Surg . 2014;60:1146 –1153.
21.Zierler RE. Duplex ultrasound follow-up after
fenestrated and branched endovascular aneurysm repair(FEVAR and BEVAR). Semin Vasc Surg . 2020;33:60 –64.
22.Chaikof EL, Dalman RL, Eskandari MK, et al. The
Society for Vascular Surgery practice guidelines on the
care of patients with an abdominal aortic aneurysm.J Vasc Surg . 2018;67:2 –77.e72.
7.1. Presentation1.Meszaros I, Morocz J, Szlavi J, et al. Epidemiology
and clinicopathology of aortic dissection. Chest .
2000;117:1271 –1278.
2.Evangelista A, Isselbacher EM, Bossone E, et al.
Insights from the International Registry of Acute AorticDissection: a 20-year experience of collaborative
clinical research. Circulation . 2018;137:1846 –1860.
3.Bossone E, Pyeritz RE, O ’Gara P, et al. Acute aortic
dissection in blacks: insights from the InternationalRegistry of Acute Aortic Dissection. Am J Med .
2013;126:909 –915.
4.Bossone E, LaBounty TM, Eagle KA. Acute aortic
syndromes: diagnosis and management, an update.Eur Heart J . 2018;39:739d –749d.
5.Nienaber CA, Fattori R, Mehta RH, et al. Gender-
related differences in acute aortic dissection. Circula-
tion. 2004;109:3014 –3021.
7.2. AAS: Diagnostic Evaluation (Imaging, Lab-
oratory Testing)
1.Bhave NM, Nienaber CA, Clough RE, et al. Multi-
modality imaging of thoracic aortic diseases in adults.J Am Coll Cardiol Img . 2018;11:902
–919.
2.Strayer RJ, Shearer PL, Hermann LK. Screening,
evaluation, and early management of acute aortic
dissection in the ED. Curr Cardiol Rev . 2012;8:152 –157.
3.Shiga T, Wajima Z, Apfel CC, et al. Diagnostic ac-
curacy of transesophageal echocardiography, helicalcomputed tomography, and magnetic resonance im-aging for suspected thoracic aortic dissection: sys-tematic review and meta-analysis. Arch Intern Med .
2006;166:1350 –1356.
4.Diercks DB, Promes SB, Schuur JD, et al. Clinical
policy: critical issues in the evaluation and manage-
ment of adult patients with suspected acute non-traumatic thoracic aortic dissection. Ann Emerg Med .
2015;65:32 –42.e12.
5.Hiratzka LF, Bakris GL, Beckman JA, et al. 2010
ACCF/AHA/AATS/ACR/ASA/SCA/SCAI/SIR/STS/SVMguidelines for the diagnosis and management of pa-tients with thoracic aortic disease: a report of the
American College of Cardiology Foundation/American
Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines,American Association for Thoracic Surgery, AmericanCollege of Radiology, American Stroke Association,Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists, Societyfor Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions,
Society of Interventional Radiology, Society of
Thoracic Surgeons, and Society for Vascular Medicine.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2010;55:e27 –e129.
6.Expert Panel on Cardiac Imaging, Kicska GA, Hur-
witz Koweek LM, et al. ACR Appropriateness Criteria /C226
Suspected Acute Aortic Syndrome. J Am Coll Radiol .
2021;18:S474 –S481.
7.Nazerian P, Pivetta E, Veglia S, et al. Integrated use
of conventional chest radiography cannot rule out
acute aortic syndromes in emergency department pa-tients at low clinical probability. Acad Emerg Med .
2019;26:1255 –1265.
8.Svensson LG, Labib SB, Eisenhauer AC, et al. Intimal
tear without hematoma: an important variant of aorticdissection that can elude current imaging techniques.Circulation . 1999;99:1331 –1336.
9.Bima P, Pivetta E, Nazerian P, et al. Systematic re-
view of aortic dissection detection risk score plus D-dimer for diagnostic rule-out of suspected acute aorticsyndromes. Acad Emerg Med . 2020;27:1013 –1027.
10.Hiestand BC, Ohle R, Anjum O, et al. What is the
speciﬁcity of the aortic dissection detection risk scoreIsselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e372

in a low-prevalence population? Acad Emerg Med .
2019;26:632 –638.
11.Morello F, Bima P, Pivetta E, et al. Development
and validation of a simpli ﬁed probability assessment
score integrated with age-adjusted d-Dimer for diag-nosis of acute aortic syndromes. J Am Heart Assoc .
2021;10:e018425.
12.Suzuki T, Distante A, Zizza A, et al. Diagnosis of
acute aortic dissection by D-dimer: the InternationalRegistry of Acute Aortic Dissection Substudy on Bio-markers (IRAD-Bio) experience. Circulation . 2009;119:
2702 –2707.
13.Nazerian P, Mueller C, de Matos Soeiro A, et al.
Diagnostic accuracy of the aortic dissection detectionrisk score plus D-dimer for acute aortic syndromes: theADvISED prospective multicenter study. Circulation .
2018;137:250 –258.
14.Rogers AM, Hermann LK, Booher AM, et al.
Sensitivity of the aortic dissection detection risk score,a novel guideline-based tool for identi ﬁcation of acute
aortic dissection at initial presentation: results fromthe international registry of acute aortic dissection.Circulation . 2011;123:2213 –2218.
7.3.1. Acute Medical Management of AAS
1.Jonker FH, Trimarchi S, Rampoldi V, et al. Aortic
expansion after acute type B aortic dissection. Ann
Thorac Surg . 2012;94:1223 –1229.
2.Suzuki T, Isselbacher EM, Nienaber CA, et al. Type-
selective bene ﬁts of medications in treatment of acute
aortic dissection (from the International Registry ofAcute Aortic Dissection [IRAD]). Am J Cardiol .
2012;109:122 –127.
3.Kumar KU, Zhao Q, Bai X, et al. Controlled heart rate
and blood pressure reduce the life threatening aorticevents and increase survival in patients with type Baortic dissection: a single center experience. Int J
Cardiol Heart Vasc . 2015;8:73 –74.
4.Wang Z, Ge M, Chen T, et al. Impact of hypertension
on short- and long-term survival of patients who un-derwent emergency surgery for type A acute aorticdissection. J Thorac Dis . 2020;12:6618 –6628.
5.Chen SW, Chan YH, Lin CP, et al. Association of
long-term use of antihypertensive medications withlate outcomes among patients with aortic dissection.JAMA Netw Open . 2021;4:e210469.
6.Qin YL, Wang F, Li TX, et al. Endovascular repair
compared with medical management of patients withuncomplicated type B acute aortic dissection. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2016;67:2835 –2842.
7.Grubb BP, Sirio C, Zelis R. Intravenous labetalol in
acute aortic dissection. JAMA . 1987;258:78 –79.
8.Ulici A, Jancik J, Lam TS, et al. Clevidipine versus
sodium nitroprusside in acute aortic dissection: aretrospective chart review. Am J Emerg Med . 2017;35:
1514 –
1518.
9.Fattori R, Cao P, De Rango P, et al. Interdisciplinary
expert consensus document on management of type Baortic dissection. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2013;61:1661 –
1678.
10.Qin YL, Wang F, Li TX, et al. Endovascular repair
compared with medical management of patients withuncomplicated type B acute aortic dissection. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2016;67:2835 –2842.
11.Lu N, Ma X, Xu T, et al. Optimal blood pressure
control for patients after thoracic endovascular aorticrepair of type B aortic dissection. BMC Cardiovasc
Disord . 2019;19:124.
12.Masaki N, Kumagai K, Sasaki K, et al. Suppressive
effect of pitavastatin on aortic arch dilatation in acuteStanford type B aortic dissection: analysis of STANPtrial. Gen Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2018;66:334 –343.
7.3.2. Subsequent Medical Management of AAS
1.Suzuki T, Isselbacher EM, Nienaber CA, et al. Type-
selective bene ﬁts of medications in treatment of acute
aortic dissection (from the International Registry ofAcute Aortic Dissection [IRAD]). Am J Cardiol .
2012;109:122 –127.
2.Lu N, Ma X, Xu T, et al. Optimal blood pressure
control for patients after thoracic endovascular aorticrepair of type B aortic dissection. BMC Cardiovasc
Disord . 2019;19:124.
3.Wang Z, Ge M, Chen T, et al. Impact of hypertension
on short- and long-term survival of patients who un-derwent emergency surgery for type A acute aorticdissection. J Thorac Dis . 2020;12:6618 –6628.
4.Chen SW, Chan YH, Lin CP, et al. Association of
long-term use of antihypertensive medications withlate outcomes among patients with aortic dissection.JAMA Netw Open . 2021;4:e210469.
5.Fattori R, Cao P, De Rango P, et al. Interdisciplinary
expert consensus document on management of type B
aortic dissection. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2013;61:1661 –
1678.
6.Kumar KU, Zhao Q, Bai X, et al. Controlled heart rate
and blood pressure reduce the life threatening aorticevents and increase survival in patients with type Baortic dissection: a single center experience. Int J
Cardiol Heart Vasc . 2015;8:73 –74.
7.Qin YL, Wang F, Li TX, et al. Endovascular repair
compared with medical management of patients with
uncomplicated type B acute aortic dissection. J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2016;67:2835 –2842.
8.Doyle JJ, Doyle AJ, Wilson NK, et al. A deleterious
gene-by-environment interaction imposed by calciumchannel blockers in Marfan syndrome. Elife. 2015;4:
e08648.
7.4.1.1. Initial Surgical Considerations in Acute
Type A Aortic Dissection
1.Hagan PG, Nienaber CA, Isselbacher EM, et al. The
International Registry of Acute Aortic Dissection(IRAD): new insights into an old disease. JAMA .
2000;283:897 –903.
2.
Pape LA, Awais M, Woznicki EM, et al. Presen-
tation, diagnosis, and outcomes of acute aortic
dissection: 17-year trends from the International
Registry of Acute Aortic Dissection. JA mC o l l
Cardiol . 2015;66:350 –358.
3.Goldstone AB, Chiu P, Baiocchi M, et al. Interfacility
transfer of Medicare bene ﬁciaries with acute type A
aortic dissection and regionalization of care in theUnited States. Circulation . 2019;140:1239 –1250.
4.Umana-Pizano JB, Nissen AP, Sandhu HK, et al.
Acute type A dissection repair by high-volume vs low-volume surgeons at a high-volume aortic center. Ann
Thorac Surg . 2019;108:1330 –1336.
5.Di Eusanio M, Patel HJ, Nienaber CA, et al. Patients
with type A acute aortic dissection presenting withmajor brain injury: should we operate on them?J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2013;145:S213 –S221.e1.6.Estrera AL, Garami Z, Miller CC, et al. Acute type A
aortic dissection complicated by stroke: can immediaterepair be performed safely? J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg .
2006;132:1404 –1408.
7.Rampoldi V, Trimarchi S, Eagle KA, et al. Simple risk
models to predict surgical mortality in acute type Aaortic dissection: the International Registry of AcuteAortic Dissection score. Ann Thorac Surg . 2007;83:55 –
61.
8.Trimarchi S, Nienaber CA, Rampoldi V, et al.
Contemporary results of surgery in acute type A aorticdissection: the International Registry of Acute AorticDissection Experience. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg .
2005;129:112 –122.
9.Long SM, Tribble CG, Raymond DP, et al. Preoper-
ative shock determines outcome for acute type Aaortic dissection. Ann Thorac Surg . 2003;75:520 –524.
10.Hattori S, Noguchi K, Gunji Y, et al. Acute type A
aortic dissection in non-agenarians: to cut or not.Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg . 2020;31:102 –107.
11.Biancari F, Vasques F, Benenati V, et al. Contem-
porary results after surgical repair of type A aorticdissection in patients aged 80 years and older: a sys-tematic review and meta-analysis. Eur J Cardiothorac
Surg. 2011;40:1058 –1063.
12.Kawahito K, Kimura N, Yamaguchi A, et al. Early
and late surgical outcomes of acute type A aorticdissection in octogenarians. Ann Thorac Surg .
2018;105:137 –143.
13.Suzuki T, Asai T, Kinoshita T. Emergency surgery
for acute type A aortic dissection in octogenarianswithout patient selection. Ann Thorac Surg . 2019;107:
1146 –1153.
14.Zindovic I, Sjogren J, Bjursten H, et al. Impact of
hemodynamic instability and organ malperfusion inelderly surgical patients treated for acute type A aorticdissection. J Card Surg . 2015;30:822 –829.
15.
Braverman AC. Acute aortic dissection: clinician
update. Circulation . 2010;122:184 –188.
16.Matthews CR, Madison M, Timsina LR, et al. Impact
of time between diagnosis to treatment in acute type Aaortic dissection. Sci Rep . 2021;11:3519.
17.Qiu J, Zhang L, Luo X, et al. Higher mortality in
patients undergoing nighttime surgical procedures foracute type A aortic dissection. Ann Thorac Surg .
2018;106:1164 –1170.
18.Ahlsson A, Wickbom A, Geirsson A, et al. Is there a
weekend effect in surgery for type A dissection?: re-sults from the Nordic Consortium for Acute type AAortic Dissection database. Ann Thorac Surg .
2019;108:770 –776.
19.Gokalp O, Yilik L, Besir Y, et al. Overtime hours
effect" on emergency surgery of acute type A aorticdissection. Braz J Cardiovasc Surg . 2019;34:680 –686.
20.Gasser S, Stastny L, Ko ﬂer M, et al. Surgery out of
ofﬁce hours for type A aortic dissection: does night-
time and weekend surgery worsen outcome? Interact
Cardiovasc Thorac Surg . 2020;31:806 –812.
21.Sultan I, Bianco V, Patel HJ, et al. Surgery for type
A aortic dissection in patients with cerebral malper-fusion: results from the International Registry of AcuteAortic Dissection. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2021;161:
1713 –1720.e1.
22.Tsukube T, Hayashi T, Kawahira T, et al. Neuro-
logical outcomes after immediate aortic repair forJACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee373

acute type A aortic dissection complicated by coma.
Circulation . 2011;124:S163 –S167.
23.Chiu P, Rotto TJ, Goldstone AB, et al. Time-to-oper-
ation does not predict outcome in acute type A aorticdissection complicated by neurologic injury at presenta-tion. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2019;158:665 –672.
24.Berretta P, Trimarchi S, Patel HJ, et al. Malperfu-
sion syndromes in type A aortic dissection: what we
have learned from IRAD. J Vis Surg . 2018;4:65.
25.Fukuhara S, Norton EL, Chaudhary N, et al. Type A
aortic dissection with cerebral malperfusion: new in-sights. Ann Thorac Surg . 2020;112:501 –509.
7.4.1.2. Management of Malperfusion
1.Berretta P, Trimarchi S, Patel HJ, et al. Malperfusion
syndromes in type A aortic dissection: what we havelearned from IRAD. J Vis Surg . 2018;4:65.
2.Geirsson A, Szeto WY, Pochettino A, et al. Signi ﬁ-
cance of malperfusion syndromes prior to contempo-rary surgical repair for acute type A dissection:
outcomes and need for additional revascularizations.
Eur J Cardiothorac Surg . 2007;32:255 –262.
3.Leshnower BG, Keeling WB, Duwayri YM, et al. The
"thoracic endovascular aortic repair- ﬁrst" strategy for
acute type A dissection with mesenteric malperfusion:Initial results compared with conventional algorithms.J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2019;158:1516 –1524.
4.Yang B, Rosati CM, Norton EL, et al. Endovascular
fenestration/stenting ﬁrst followed by delayed open
aortic repair for acute type A aortic dissection with mal-
perfusion syndrome. Circulation . 2018;138:2091 –2103.
5.Yang B, Norton EL, Rosati CM, et al. Managing pa-
tients with acute type A aortic dissection and mesen-teric malperfusion syndrome: a 20-year experience.J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2019;158:675 –687.e4.
6.Lawton JS, Moon MR, Liu J, et al. The profound
impact of combined severe acidosis and malperfusionon operative mortality in the surgical treatment oftype A aortic dissection. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg .
2018;155:897 –904.
7.Zindovic I, Gudbjartsson T, Ahlsson A, et al. Mal-
perfusion in acute type A aortic dissection: an update
from the Nordic Consortium for Acute Type A AorticDissection. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2019;157:1324 –
1333.e1326.
8.Uchida K, Karube N, Kasama K, et al. Early reper-
fusion strategy improves the outcomes of surgery fortype A acute aortic dissection with malperfusion.J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2018;156:483 –489.
9.Kawahito K, Kimura N, Yamaguchi A, et al. Malper-
fusion in type A aortic dissection: results of emergency
central aortic repair. Gen Thorac Cardiovasc Surg .
2019;67:594 –601.
10.Evangelista A, Isselbacher EM, Bossone E, et al.
Insights from the International Registry of Acute Aortic
Dissection: a 20-year experience of collaborativeclinical research. Circulation . 2018;137:1846 –1860.
11.Yamashiro S, Arakaki R, Kise Y, et al. Management
of visceral malperfusion complicated with acute type Aaortic dissection. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg .
2015;21:346 –351.
7.4.1.3. Surgical Repair Strategies in Acute Type
A Aortic Dissection
1.Hysi I, Juthier F, Fabre O, et al. Aortic root surgery
improves long-term survival after acute type A aorticdissection. Int J Cardiol . 2015;184:285 –290.2.Peterss S, Dumfarth J, Rizzo JA, et al. Sparing the
aortic root in acute aortic dissection type A: riskreduction and restored integrity of the untouchedroot. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg . 2016;50:232 –239.
3.Chen SK, Qiu ZH, Fang GH, et al. Reported outcomes
after aortic valve resuspension for acute type A aortic
dissection: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg . 2019;29:331 –338.
4.Saczkowski R, Malas T, Mesana T, et al. Aortic valve
preservation and repair in acute type A aortic dissec-tion. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg . 2014;45:e220 –e226.
5.Qiu J, Wu J, Xie E, et al. Surgical management and
outcomes of the aortic root in acute type A aorticdissection. Ann Thorac Surg . 2020;110:136 –143.
6.Vendramin I, Lechiancole A, Piani D, et al. Type A
acute aortic dissection with $40-mm aortic root: re-
sults of conservative and replacement strategies at
long-term follow-up. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg . 2021;59:
1115 –1122.
7.Di Eusanio M, Trimarchi S, Peterson MD, et al. Root
replacement surgery versus more conservative man-agement during type A acute aortic dissection repair.Ann Thorac Surg . 2014;98:2078 –2084.
8.Yang B, Norton EL, Hobbs R, et al. Short- and long-
term outcomes of aortic root repair and replacement inpatients undergoing acute type A aortic dissectionrepair: twenty-year experience. J Thorac Cardiovasc
Surg. 2019;157:2125 –2136.
9.Malaisrie SC, Szeto WY, Halas M, et al. 2021 The
American Association for Thoracic Surgery expertconsensus document: surgical treatment of acute typeA aortic dissection. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2021;162:
735–758.e2.
10.Beckmann E, Martens A, Pertz J, et al. Valve-
sparing David I procedure in acute aortic type Adissection: a 20-year experience with more than 100patients. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg . 2017;52:319 –324.
11.Mosbahi S, Stak D, Gravestock I, et al. A systemic
review and meta-analysis: Bentall versus David pro-
cedure in acute type A aortic dissection. Eur J Car-
diothorac Surg . 2019;55:201 –209.
12.Geirsson A, Shioda K, Olsson C, et al. Differential
outcomes of open and clamp-on distal anastomosistechniques in acute type A aortic dissection. J Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg . 2019;157:1750 –1758.
13.Malvindi PG, Modi A, Miskolczi S, et al. Open and
closed distal anastomosis for acute type A aorticdissection repair. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg .
2016;22:776 –783.
14.Lawton JS, Liu J, Kulshrestha K, et al. The impact
of surgical strategy on survival after repair of type Aaortic dissection. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2015;150:
294 –301.e291.
15.Rampoldi V, Trimarchi S, Eagle KA, et al. Simple risk
models to predict surgical mortality in acute type Aaortic dissection: the International Registry of AcuteAortic Dissection score. Ann Thorac Surg . 2007;83:55 –
61.
16.Hsieh WC, Kan CD, Yu HC, et al. Ascending aorta
replacement vs. total aortic arch replacement in the
treatment of acute type A dissection: a meta-analysis.Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci . 2019;23:9590 –9611.
17.Poon SS, Theologou T, Harrington D, et al. Hemi-
arch versus total aortic arch replacement in acute typeA dissection: a systematic review and meta-analysis.Ann Cardiothorac Surg . 2016;5:156 –173.18.Yan Y, Xu L, Zhang H, et al. Proximal aortic repair
versus extensive aortic repair in the treatment of acutetype A aortic dissection: a meta-analysis. Eur J Car-
diothorac Surg . 2016;49:1392 –1401.
19.Preventza O, Cervera R, Cooley DA, et al. Acute
type I aortic dissection: traditional versus hybrid repairwith antegrade stent delivery to the descendingthoracic aorta. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2014;148:119 –
125.
20.Roselli EE, Idrees JJ, Bakaeen FG, et al. Evolution
of simpli ﬁed frozen elephant trunk repair for acute
DeBakey type I dissection: midterm outcomes. Ann
Thorac Surg . 2018;105:749 –755.
21.Benedetto U, Mohamed H, Vitulli P, et al. Axillary
versus femoral arterial cannulation in type A acuteaortic dissection: evidence from a meta-analysis ofcomparative studies and adjusted risk estimates. Eur J
Cardiothorac Surg . 2015;48:953 –959.
22.Ren Z, Wang Z, Hu R, et al. Which cannulation
(axillary cannulation or femoral cannulation) is betterfor acute type A aortic dissection repair? A meta-analysis of nine clinical studies. Eur J Cardiothorac
Surg. 2015;47:408 –415.
23.Wiedemann D, Kocher A, Dorfmeister M, et al.
Effect of cerebral protection strategy on outcomeof patients with Stanford type A aortic dissection.J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2013;146:647 –655.e641.
24.Preventza O, Simpson KH, Cooley DA, et al. Uni-
lateral versus bilateral cerebral perfusion for acute
type A aortic dissection. Ann Thorac Surg . 2015;99:80 –
87.
25.
Samanidis G, Kanakis M, Khoury M, et al. Ante-
grade and retrograde cerebral perfusion during acutetype A aortic dissection repair in 290 patients. Heart
Lung Circ . 2021;30:1075 –1083.
26.Jormalainen M, Raivio P, Mustonen C, et al. Direct
aortic versus peripheral arterial cannulation in surgeryfor type A aortic dissection. Ann Thorac Surg .
2020;110:1251 –1258.
27.Kreibich M, Chen Z, Rylski B, et al. Outcome after
aortic, axillary, or femoral cannulation for acute type A
aortic dissection. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2019;158:
27–34.e29.
28.Preventza O, Bakaeen FG, Stephens EH, et al.
Innominate artery cannulation: an alternative tofemoral or axillary cannulation for arterial in ﬂow in
proximal aortic surgery. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg .
2013;145:S191 –S196.
29.Reece TB, Tribble CG, Smith RL, et al. Central
cannulation is safe in acute aortic dissection repair.J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2007;133:428 –434.
30.Khaladj N, Shrestha M, Peterss S, et al. Ascending
aortic cannulation in acute aortic dissection type A: theHannover experience. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg .
2008;34:792 –796; discussion 796.
31.Frederick JR, Yang E, Trubelja A, et al. Ascending
aortic cannulation in acute type A dissection repair.
Ann Thorac Surg . 2013;95:1808 –1811.
32.Zierer A, Voeller RK, Hill KE, et al. Aortic enlarge-
ment and late reoperation after repair of acute type Aaortic dissection. Ann Thorac Surg . 2007;84:479 –486;
discussion 486-487.
33.Wu J, Huang Y, Qiu J, et al. Is valve-sparing root
replacement a safe option in acute type A aorticIsselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e374

dissection? A systematic review and meta-analysis.
Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg . 2019;29:766 –775.
34.Moon MR, Sundt TM 3rd, Pasque MK, et al. Does
the extent of proximal or distal resection in ﬂuence
outcome for type A dissections? Ann Thorac Surg .
2001;71:1244 –1249; discussion 1249-1250.
35.Preventza O, Olive JK, Liao JL, et al. Acute type I
aortic dissection with or without antegrade stent de-
livery: mid-term outcomes. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg .
2019;158:1273 –1281.
36.Takagi H, Umemoto T. A meta-analysis of total
arch replacement with frozen elephant trunk in acute
type A aortic dissection. Vasc Endovascular Surg .
2016;50:33 –46.
37.Vallabhajosyula P, Szeto WY, Pulsipher A, et al.
Antegrade thoracic stent grafting during repair of
acute Debakey type I dissection promotes distal aortic
remodeling and reduces late open distal reoperationrate. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2014;147:942 –948.
38.Chen LW, Lu L, Dai XF, et al. Total arch repair with
open triple-branched stent graft placement for acute
type A aortic dissection: experience with 122 patients.J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2014;148:521 –528.
39.Rylski B, Perez M, Beyersdorf F, et al. Acute non-A
non-B aortic dissection: incidence, treatment and
outcome. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg . 2017;52:1111 –1117.
40.Takagi H, Umemoto T. A Meta-Analysis of the
association of chronic obstructive pulmonary diseasewith abdominal aortic aneurysm presence. Ann Vasc
Surg. 2016;34:84 –94.
41.Chiu P, Trojan J, Tsou S, et al. Limited root repair in
acute type A aortic dissection is safe but results inincreased risk of reoperation. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg .
2018;155:1 –7.e1.
42.Halstead JC, Spielvogel D, Meier DM, et al. Com-
posite aortic root replacement in acute type Adissection: time to rethink the indications? Eur J Car-
diothorac Surg . 2005;27:626 –632; discussion 632-633.
43.Geirsson A, Szeto WY, Pochettino A, et al. Signi ﬁ-
cance of malperfusion syndromes prior to contempo-rary surgical repair for acute type A dissection:outcomes and need for additional revascularizations.
Eur J Cardiothorac Surg . 2007;32:255 –262.
44.Castrovinci S, Pacini D, Di Marco L, et al. Surgical
management of aortic root in type A acute aorticdissection: a propensity-score analysis. Eur J Car-
diothorac Surg . 2016;50:223 –229.
45.Nishida H, Tabata M, Fukui T, et al. Surgical
strategy and outcome for aortic root in patients un-
dergoing repair of acute type A aortic dissection. Ann
Thorac Surg . 2016;101:1464 –1469.
46.Ergin MA, McCullough J, Galla JD, et al. Radical
replacement of the aortic root in acute type Adissection: indications and outcome. Eur J Cardiothorac
Surg. 1996;10:840 –844; discussion 845.
47.Fichadiya A, Gregory AJ, Kotha VK, et al.
Extended-arch repair for acute type-A aortic dissec-tion: perioperative and mid-term results. Eur J Car-
diothorac Surg . 2019;56:714 –721.
48.Kazui T, Yamashita K, Washiyama N, et al. Impact
of an aggressive surgical approach on surgicaloutcome in type A aortic dissection. Ann Thorac Surg .
2002;74:S1844 –S1847; discussion S1857-S1863.
49.Easo J, Weigang E, Hölzl PP, et al. In ﬂuence of
operative strategy for the aortic arch in DeBakey type Iaortic dissection: analysis of the German Registry for
Acute Aortic Dissection Type A. J Thorac Cardiovasc
Surg. 2012;144:617 –623.
50.Helder MRK, Schaff HV, Day CN, et al. Regional
and temporal trends in the outcomes of repairs foracute type A aortic dissections. Ann Thorac Surg .
2020;109:26 –33.
51.Lin HH, Liao SF, Wu CF, et al. Outcome of frozen
elephant trunk technique for acute type A aorticdissection: as systematic review and meta-analysis.Medicine (Baltimore) . 2015;94:e694.
52.Smith HN, Boodhwani M, Ouzounian M, et al.
Classi ﬁcation and outcomes of extended arch repair for
acute type A aortic dissection: a systematic review andmeta-analysis. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg .
2017;24:450 –459.
53.Preventza O, Liao JL, Olive JK, et al. Neurologic
complications after the frozen elephant trunk pro-cedure: a meta-analysis of more than 3000 patients.J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2020;160:20 –33.e4.
54.Tong G, Zhang B, Zhou X, et al. Bilateral versus
unilateral antegrade cerebral perfusion in total arch
replacement for type A aortic dissection. J Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg . 2017;154:767 –775.
55.Liu Z, Wang C, Zhang X, et al. Effect of different
types of cerebral perfusion for acute type A aortic
dissection undergoing aortic arch procedure, unilateral
versus bilateral. BMC Surg . 2020;20:286.
56.Angleitner P, Stelzmueller ME, Mahr S, et al.
Bilateral or unilateral antegrade cerebral perfusion
during surgery for acute type A dissection. J Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg . 2020;159:2159 –2167.e2152.
57.Tiwari KK, Murzi M, Bevilacqua S, et al. Which
cannulation (ascending aortic cannulation or periph-eral arterial cannulation) is better for acute type A
aortic dissection surgery?
Interact Cardiovasc Thorac
Surg. 2010;10:797 –802.
58.Preventza O, Garcia A, Tuluca A, et al. Innominate
artery cannulation for proximal aortic surgery: out-comes and neurological events in 263 patients. Eur J
Cardiothorac Surg . 2015;48:937 –942; discussion 942.
59.Payabyab EC, Hemli JM, Mattia A, et al. The use of
innominate artery cannulation for antegrade cerebralperfusion in aortic dissection. J Cardiothorac Surg .
2020;15:205.
60.Harky A, Wong CHM, Chan JSK, et al. Innominate
artery cannulation in aortic surgery: a systematic re-view. J Card Surg . 2018;33:818 –825.
7.4.2. Management of Acute Type B Aortic
Dissection
1.Suzuki T, Mehta RH, Ince H, et al. Clinical pro ﬁles
and outcomes of acute type B aortic dissection in thecurrent era: lessons from the International Registry ofAortic Dissection (IRAD). Circulation . 2003;108(Suppl
1):II312 –II317.
2.Estrera AL, Miller CC 3rd, Sa ﬁHJ, et al. Outcomes of
medical management of acute type B aortic dissection.Circulation . 2006;114:I384 –I389.
3.Umana JP, Lai DT, Mitchell RS, et al. Is medical
therapy still the optimal treatment strategy for pa-tients with acute type B aortic dissections? J Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg . 2002;124:896 –910.
4.Cambria RP, Conrad MF, Matsumoto AH, et al.
Multicenter clinical trial of the conformable stent graftfor the treatment of acute, complicated type B
dissection. J Vasc Surg . 2015;62:271 –278.
5.The VIRTUE Registry Investigators. Mid-term out-
comes and aortic remodeling after thoracic endovas-
cular repair for acute, subacute, and chronic aorticdissection: the VIRTUE Registry. Eur J Vasc Endovasc
Surg. 2014;48:363 –371.
6.Zipfel B, Czerny M, Funovics M, et al. Endovascular
treatment of patients with types A and B thoracic
aortic dissection using Relay thoracic stent-grafts: re-
sults from the RESTORE Patient Registry. J Endovasc
Ther. 2011;18:131 –143.
7.Norton EL, Williams DM, Kim KM, et al. Manage-
ment of acute type B aortic dissection with malper-
fusion via endovascular fenestration/stenting. J Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg . 2020;160:1151 –1161.e1151.
8.Brunkwall J, Kasprzak P, Verhoeven E, et al. Endo-
vascular repair of acute uncomplicated aortic type Bdissection promotes aortic remodelling: 1 year resultsof the ADSORB trial. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg .
2014;48:285 –291.
9.Schwartz SI, Durham C, Clouse WD, et al. Predictors
of late aortic intervention in patients with medically
treated type B aortic dissection. J Vasc Surg . 2018;67:
78–84.
10.Nienaber CA, Kische S, Akin I, et al. Strategies for
subacute/chronic type B aortic dissection: the Inves-tigation Of Stent Grafts in Patients with type B AorticDissection (INSTEAD) trial 1-year outcome. J Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg . 2010;140(suppl 6):S101 –S108; dis-
cussion S142-S146.
11.Cambria RP, Crawford RS, Cho JS, et al.
A multicenter clinical trial of endovascular stent graftrepair of acute catastrophes of the descending thoracicaorta. J Vasc Surg . 2009;50:1255 –1264. e1-4.
12.Sachs T, Pomposelli F, Hagberg R, et al. Open and
endovascular repair of type B aortic dissection in the
Nationwide Inpatient Sample. J Vasc Surg . 2010;52:
860 –866; discussion 866.
13.Nienaber CA, Kische S, Rousseau H, et al. Endo-
vascular repair of type B aortic dissection: long-term
results of the randomized investigation of stent
grafts in aortic dissection trial. Circ Cardiovasc Interv .
2013;6:407 –416.
14.Torrent DJ, McFarland GE, Wang G, et al. Timing
of thoracic endovascular aortic repair for uncompli-cated acute type B aortic dissection and the asso-
ciation with complications. J Vasc Surg . 2021;73:
826 –835.
15.Trimarchi S, Eagle KA, Nienaber CA, et al. Impor-
tance of refractory pain and hypertension in acute type
B aortic dissection. Insights from the InternationalRegistry of Acute Aortic Dissection (IRAD). Circulation .
2010;122:1283 –1289.
7.5. Management of IMH
1.Harris KM, Braverman AC, Eagle KA, et al. Acute
aortic intramural hematoma: an analysis from the In-ternational Registry of Acute Aortic Dissection. Circu-
lation . 2012;126:S91 –S96.
2.Tolenaar JL, Harris KM, Upchurch GR Jr, et al. The
differences and similarities between intramural he-matoma of the descending aorta and acute type Bdissection. J Vasc Surg . 2013;58:1498 –1504.
3.Chou AS, Ziganshin BA, Charilaou P, et al. Long-term
behavior of aortic intramural hematomas andJACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee375

penetrating ulcers. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2016;151:
361–373.e1.
4.Hata M, Hata H, Sezai A, et al. Optimal treatment
strategy for type A acute aortic dissection with intra-mural hematoma. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2014;147:
307–311.
5.Matsushita A, Fukui T, Tabata M, et al. Preoperative
characteristics and surgical outcomes of acute intra-
mural hematoma involving the ascending aorta: apropensity score-matched analysis. J Thorac Car-
diovasc Surg . 2016;151:351 –358.
6.Sandhu HK, Tanaka A, Charlton-Ouw KM, et al.
Outcomes and management of type A intramural he-matoma. Ann Cardiothorac Surg . 2016;5:317 –327.
7.Choi YJ, Son JW, Lee SH, et al. Treatment patterns
and their outcomes of acute aortic intramural hema-
toma in real world: multicenter registry for aortic
intramural hematoma. BMC Cardiovasc Disord .
2014;14:103.
8.Wee I, Varughese RS, Syn N, et al. Non-operative
management of type A acute aortic syndromes: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur J Vasc
Endovasc Surg . 2019;58:41 –51.
9.Chow SCY, Wong RHL, Lakhani I, et al. Management
of acute type A intramural hematoma: upfront surgery
or individualized approach? A retrospective analysis
and meta-analysis. J Thorac Dis . 2020;12:680 –689.
10.Shi Y, Dun Y, Guo H, et al. Clinical features and
surgical outcomes of type A intramural hematoma.
J Thorac Dis . 2020;12:3964 –3975.
11.Kitamura T, Torii S, Miyamoto T, et al. Watch-and-
wait strategy for type A intramural haematoma andacute aortic dissection with thrombosed false lumen of
the ascending aorta: a Japanese single-centre experi-
ence. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg . 2020;58:590 –597.
12.Song JK, Yim JH, Ahn JM, et al. Outcomes of pa-
tients with acute type A aortic intramural hematoma.Circulation . 2009;120:2046 –2052.
13.Schoenhoff FS, Zanchin C, Czerny M, et al. Aorta
related and all-cause mortality in patients with aorticintramural haematoma. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg .
2017;54:447 –453.
14.Chakos A, Twindyawardhani T, Evangelista A, et al.
Endovascular versus medical management of type Bintramural hematoma: a meta-analysis. Ann Car-
diothorac Surg . 2019;8:447 –455.
15.Moral S, Cuéllar H, Avegliano G, et al. Clinical im-
plications of focal intimal disruption in patients withtype B intramural hematoma. J Am Coll Cardiol.
2017;69:28 –39.
16.Moral S, Ballesteros E, Roque M, et al. Intimal
disruption in type B aortic intramural hematoma. Doessize matter? A systematic review and meta-analysis.Int J Cardiol . 2018;269:298 –303.
17.Li L, Jiao Y, Zou J, et al. Thoracic endovascular
aortic repair versus best medical treatment for high-risk type B intramural hematoma: a systematic reviewof clinical studies. Ann Vasc Surg . 2018;52:273 –279.
18.Kageyama S, Mitake H, Nakajima A, et al. A novel
risk score on admission for predicting death or need forsurgery in patients with acute type A intramural he-matoma receiving medical therapy. Heart Vessels .
2020;35:1164 –1170.
19.Ganaha F, Miller DC, Sugimoto K, et al. Prog-
nosis of aortic intramural hematoma with andwithout penetrating atherosclerotic ulcer: a clinical
and radiological analysis. Circulation . 2002;106:342 –
348.
20.Evangelista A, Dominguez R, Sebastia C, et al.
Prognostic value of clinical and morphologic ﬁndings in
short-term evolution of aortic intramural haematoma.Therapeutic implications. Eur Heart J . 2004;25:81 –87.
21.Li Z, Chen Y, Guo J, et al. Prediction of adverse
events in patients with initially medically treated typeA intramural hematoma. Int J Cardiol . 2020;313:114 –
120.
22.Li Z, Lu B, Chen Y, et al. Acute type B aortic
intramural hematoma: the added prognostic value of a
follow-up CT. Eur Radiol . 2019;29:6571 –6580.
7.6.1. PAU With IMH, Rupture, or Both
1.Ganaha F, Miller DC, Sugimoto K, et al. Prognosis of
aortic intramural hematoma with and without pene-
trating atherosclerotic ulcer: a clinical and radiologicalanalysis. Circulation . 2002;106:342 –348.
2.Tittle SL, Lynch RJ, Cole PE, et al. Midterm follow-
up of penetrating ulcer and intramural hematoma of
the aorta. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2002;123:1051 –
1059.
3.Chou AS, Ziganshin BA, Charilaou P, et al. Long-term
behavior of aortic intramural hematomas and pene-trating ulcers. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2016;151:361 –
373.e1.
4.Georgiadis GS, Antoniou GA, Georgakarakos EI,
et al. Surgical or endovascular therapy of abdominalpenetrating aortic ulcers and their natural history: a
systematic review. J Vasc Interv Radiol . 2013;24:1437 –
1449.e1433.
5.Nathan DP, Boonn W, Lai E, et al. Presentation,
complications, and natural history of penetratingatherosclerotic ulcer disease. J Vasc Surg . 2012;55:10 –
15.
6.Cho KR, Stanson AW, Potter DD, et al. Penetrating
atherosclerotic ulcer of the descending thoracic aortaand arch. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2004;127:1393 –
1399; discussion 1399-1401.
7.Kotsis T, Spyropoulos BG, Asaloumidis N, et al.
Penetrating atherosclerotic ulcers of the abdominalaorta: a case report and review of the literature. Vasc
Spec Int . 2019;35:152 –159.
7.6.2. Isolated PAU
1.Ganaha F, Miller DC, Sugimoto K, et al. Prognosis of
aortic intramural hematoma with and without pene-trating atherosclerotic ulcer: a clinical and radiologicalanalysis. Circulation . 2002;106:342 –348.
2.Tittle SL, Lynch RJ, Cole PE, et al. Midterm follow-
up of penetrating ulcer and intramural hematoma ofthe aorta. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2002;123:1051 –
1059.
3.Chou AS, Ziganshin BA, Charilaou P, et al. Long-term
behavior of aortic intramural hematomas and pene-trating ulcers. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2016;151:361 –
373.e1.
4.Yang L, Zhang QY, Wang XZ, et al. Long-term im-
aging evolution and clinical prognosis among patientswith acute penetrating aortic ulcers: a retrospectiveobservational study. J Am Heart Assoc . 2020;9:
e014505.
5.Nathan DP, Boonn W, Lai E, et al. Presentation,
complications, and natural history of penetratingatherosclerotic ulcer disease. J Vasc Surg . 2012;55:10 –
15.
6.Georgiadis GS, Antoniou GA, Georgakarakos EI,
et al. Surgical or endovascular therapy of abdominal
penetrating aortic ulcers and their natural history: asystematic review. J Vasc Interv Radiol . 2013;24:1437 –
1449.e1433.
7.Salim S, Locci R, Martin G, et al. Short- and long-
term outcomes in isolated penetrating aortic ulcer
disease. J Vasc Surg . 2020;72:84 –91.
8.D’Annoville T, Ozdemir BA, Alric P, et al. Thoracic
endovascular aortic repair for penetrating aortic ulcer:literature review. Ann Thorac Surg . 2016;101:2272 –
2278.
9.Cho KR, Stanson AW, Potter DD, et al. Penetrating
atherosclerotic ulcer of the descending thoracic aortaand arch. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2004;127:1393 –
1399; discussion 1399-1401.
10.DeCarlo C, Latz CA, Boitano LT, et al. Prognosti-
cation of asymptomatic penetrating aortic ulcers: amodern approach. Circulation . 2021;144:1091 –1101.
11.Gifford SM, Duncan AA, Greiten LE, et al. The nat-
ural history and outcomes for thoracic and abdominal
penetrating aortic ulcers. J Vasc Surg . 2016;63:1182 –
1188.
7.6.3. PAU Open Surgical Repair Versus Endo-
vascular Repair
1.Amis ES Jr, Butler PF, American College of Radi-
ology. ACR white paper on radiation dose inmedicine: three years later. JA mC o l lR a d i o l .2 0 1 0 ; 7 :
865 –870.
2.Brenner DJ, Hall EJ. Computed tomography –an
increasing source of radiation exposure. N Engl J Med .
2007;357:2277 –2284.
3.Costello JE, Cecava ND, Tucker JE, et al. CT ra-
diation dose: current controversies and dose reduc-tion strategies. AJR Am J Roentgenol . 2013;201:
1283 –1290.
4.Georgiadis GS, Antoniou GA, Georgakarakos EI,
et al. Surgical or endovascular therapy of abdominal
penetrating aortic ulcers and their natural history: asystematic review. J Vasc Interv Radiol . 2013;24:1437 –
1449.e1433.
5.Georgiadis GS, Trellopoulos G, Antoniou GA, et al.
Endovascular therapy for penetrating ulcers of the
infrarenal aorta. ANZ J Surg . 2013;83:758 –763.
6.Salim S, Locci R, Martin G, et al. Short- and long-
term outcomes in isolated penetrating aortic ulcerdisease. J Vasc Surg . 2020;72:84 –91.
7.D’Annoville T, Ozdemir BA, Alric P, et al. Thoracic
endovascular aortic repair for penetrating aortic ulcer:literature review. Ann Thorac Surg . 2016;101:2272 –
2278.
8.Ganaha F, Miller DC, Sugimoto K, et al. Prog-
nosis of aortic intramural hematoma with andwithout penetrating atherosclerotic ulcer: a clinicaland radiological analysis. Circulation .2 0 0 2 ; 1 0 6 :
342–348.
9.Tittle SL, Lynch RJ, Cole PE, et al. Midterm follow-
up of penetrating ulcer and intramural hematoma ofthe aorta. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2002;123:1051 –
1059.
10.Chou AS, Ziganshin BA, Charilaou P, et al. Long-
term behavior of aortic intramural hematomas andIsselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e376

penetrating ulcers. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2016;151:
361–373.e1.
11.Troxler M, Mavor AI, Homer-Vanniasinkam S.
Penetrating atherosclerotic ulcers of the aorta. Br J
Surg. 2001;88:1169 –1177.
12.Pape LA, Awais M, Woznicki EM, et al. Presenta-
tion, diagnosis, and outcomes of acute aortic dissec-
tion: 17-year trends from the International Registry of
Acute Aortic Dissection. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2015;66:
350–358.
13.Harris KM, Braverman AC, Eagle KA, et al. Acute
aortic intramural hematoma: an analysis from the In-ternational Registry of Acute Aortic Dissection. Circu-
lation . 2012;126:S91 –S96.
7.7.1.1. Initial Management of BTTAI in the
Emergency Department
1.Pate JW, Gavant ML, Weiman DS, et al. Traumatic
rupture of the aortic isthmus: program of selectivemanagement. World J Surg . 1999;23:59 –63.
2.Fabian TC, Davis KA, Gavant ML, et al. Prospective
study of blunt aortic injury: helical CT is diagnostic and
antihypertensive therapy reduces rupture. Ann Surg .
1998;227:666 –676; discussion 676-677.
3.Scalea TM, Feliciano DV, DuBose JJ, et al. Blunt
thoracic aortic injury: endovascular repair is now thestandard. J Am Coll Surg . 2019;228:605 –610.
4.Fabian TC, Richardson JD, Croce MA, et al. Pro-
spective study of blunt aortic injury: Multicenter Trialof the American Association for the Surgery of Trauma.J Trauma . 1997;42:374 –380; discussion 380-383.
5.Gombert A, Barbati ME, Storck M, et al. Treatment
of blunt thoracic aortic injury in Germany —assessment
of the TraumaRegister DGU /C226.PLoS One . 2017;12:
e0171837.
6.Lee WA, Matsumura JS, Mitchell RS, et al. Endo-
vascular repair of traumatic thoracic aortic injury:clinical practice guidelines of the Society for VascularSurgery. J Vasc Surg . 2011;53:187 –192.
7.Marcaccio CL, Dumas RP, Huang Y, et al. Delayed
endovascular aortic repair is associated with reducedin-hospital mortality in patients with blunt thoracicaortic injury. J Vasc Surg . 2018;68:64 –73.
8.Demetriades D, Velmahos GC, Scalea TM, et al.
Blunt traumatic thoracic aortic injuries: early or
delayed repair —results of an American Association for
the Surgery of Trauma prospective study. J Trauma .
2009;66:967 –973.
7.7.1.2. Approach to the Initial Management of
BTTAI
1.Lee WA, Matsumura JS, Mitchell RS, et al. Endo-
vascular repair of traumatic thoracic aortic injury:clinical practice guidelines of the Society for VascularSurgery. J Vasc Surg . 2011;53:187 –192.
2.Azizzadeh A, Keyhani K, Miller CC 3rd, et al. Blunt
traumatic aortic injury: initial experience with endo-vascular repair. J Vasc Surg . 2009;49:1403 –1408.
3.DuBose JJ, Leake SS, Brenner M, et al. Contempo-
rary management and outcomes of blunt thoracic
aortic injury: a multicenter retrospective study.
J Trauma Acute Care Surg . 2015;78:360 –369.
4.Fortuna GR Jr, Perlick A, DuBose JJ, et al. Injury
grade is a predictor of aortic-related death amongpatients with blunt thoracic aortic injury. J Vasc Surg .
2016;63:1225 –1231.5.Grigorian A, Spencer D, Donayre C, et al. National
trends of thoracic endovascular aortic repair versusopen repair in blunt thoracic aortic injury. Ann Vasc
Surg. 2018;52:72 –78.
6.Rabin J, DuBose J, Sliker CW, et al. Parameters for
successful nonoperative management of traumatic
aortic injury. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2014;147:143 –
149.
7.Starnes BW, Lundgren RS, Gunn M, et al. A new
classi ﬁcation scheme for treating blunt aortic injury.
J Vasc Surg . 2012;55:47 –54.
8.Harris DG, Rabin J, Starnes BW, et al. Evolution of
lesion-speci ﬁc management of blunt thoracic aortic
injury. J Vasc Surg . 2016;64:500 –505.
9.Gavant ML. Helical CT grading of traumatic aortic
injuries. Impact on clinical guidelines for medical andsurgical management. Radiol Clin North Am . 1999;37:
553–574, vi.
7.7.1.3. Endovascular Versus Open Surgical
Repair
1.Xenos ES, Abedi NN, Davenport DL, et al. Meta-
analysis of endovascular vs open repair for traumatic
descending thoracic aortic rupture. J Vasc Surg .
2008;48:1343 –1351.
2.Grigorian A, Spencer D, Donayre C, et al. National
trends of thoracic endovascular aortic repair versusopen repair in blunt thoracic aortic injury. Ann Vasc
Surg. 2018;52:72 –78.
3.Murad MH, Rizvi AZ, Malgor R, et al. Comparative
effectiveness of the treatments for thoracic aortictransection [corrected]. J Vasc Surg . 2011;53:193 –199.
e1-21.
4.Pang D, Hildebrand D, Bachoo P. Thoracic endo-
vascular repair (TEVAR) versus open surgery for blunt
traumatic thoracic aortic injury. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev . 2019;2:CD006642.
5.Kenel-Pierre S, Ramos Duran E, Abi-Chaker A,
et al. The role of heparin in endovascular repair ofblunt thoracic aortic injury. JV a s cS u r g .2 0 1 9 ; 7 0 :
1809 –1815.
6.Scalea TM, Feliciano DV, DuBose JJ, et al.
Blunt Thoracic Aortic Injury: Endovascular Repair
Is Now the Standard. J Am Coll Surg . 2019;228:
605 –610.
7.7.2. Initial Management of Blunt Traumatic
Abdominal Aortic Injury (BAAI)
1.Shalhub S, Starnes BW, Brenner ML, et al. Blunt
abdominal aortic injury: a Western Trauma Association
multicenter study. J Trauma Acute Care Surg . 2014;77:
879 –885; discussion 885.
2.Shalhub S, Starnes BW, Tran NT, et al. Blunt
abdominal aortic injury. J Vasc Surg . 2012;55:1277 –
1285.
3.Sheehan BM, Grigorian A, de Virgilio C, et al. Pre-
dictors of blunt abdominal aortic injury in trauma pa-tients and mortality analysis. J Vasc Surg . 2020;71:
1858 –1866.
4.de Mestral C, Dueck AD, Gomez D, et al. Associated
injuries, management, and outcomes of blunt abdom-
inal aortic injury. J Vasc Surg . 2012;56:656 –660.
5.Borovcanin Z. Anesthesia for abdominal major
vascular injury. In: Papadakos PJ, Gestring ML, eds.Encyclopedia of Trauma Care . Springer Berlin Heidel-
berg; 2015:15 –20.6.Norii T, Crandall C, Terasaka Y. Survival of severe
blunt trauma patients treated with resuscitativeendovascular balloon occlusion of the aortacompared with propensity score-adjusted untreated
patients. J Trauma Acute Care Surg . 2015;78:721 –
728.
7.Joseph B, Zeeshan M, Sakran JV, et al. Nationwide
analysis of resuscitative endovascular balloon occlu-sion of the aorta in civilian trauma. JAMA Surg .
2019;154:500 –508.
8.Manzano-Nunez R, Orlas CP, Herrera-Escobar JP,
et al. A meta-analysis of the incidence of complications
associated with groin access after the use of resusci-tative endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta intrauma patients. J Trauma Acute Care Surg . 2018;85:
626 –634.
9.Ordonez CA, Rodriguez F, Parra M, et al.
Resuscitative endovascular balloon of the aorta is
feasible in penetrating chest trauma with majorhemorrhage: proposal of a new institutionaldeployment algorithm. J Trauma Acute Care Surg .
2020;89:311 –319.
10.Darrabie MD, Croft CA, Brakenridge SC, et al.
Resuscitative endovascular balloon occlusion of the
aorta: implementation and preliminary results at an
academic level I trauma center. J Am Coll Surg .
2018;227:127 –133.
11.Moore LJ, Martin CD, Harvin JA, et al. Resusci-
tative endovascular balloon occlusion of the aortafor control of noncompressible truncal hemorrhagein the abdomen and pelvis. Am J Surg . 2016;212:
1222 –1230.
12.Yamamoto R, Cestero RF, Suzuki M, et al. Resus-
citative endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta
(REBOA) is associated with improved survival in
severely injured patients: a propensity score matchinganalysis. Am J Surg . 2019;218:1162 –1168.
13.Starnes BW, Lundgren RS, Gunn M, et al. A new
classi ﬁcation scheme for treating blunt aortic injury.
J Vasc Surg . 2012;55:47 –54.
14.Azizzadeh A, Keyhani K, Miller CC 3rd, et al.
Blunt traumatic aortic injury: initial experience withendovascular repair. J Vasc Surg . 2009;49:1403 –
1408.
7.7.3. Long-Term Management and Surveillance
After Blunt Traumatic Aortic Injury (BTAI)
1.DuBose JJ, Leake SS, Brenner M, et al.
Contemporary management and outcomes of blunt
thoracic aortic injury: a multicenter retrospective
study. J Trauma Acute Care Surg .2 0 1 5 ; 7 8 : 3 6 0 –
369.
2.Topcu AC, Ozeren-Topcu K, Bolukcu A, et al. Blunt
traumatic aortic injury: 10-year single-center experi-ence. Aorta (Stamford) . 2020;8:163 –168.
3.Charlton-Ouw KM, DuBose JJ, Leake SS, et al.
Observation may be safe in selected cases of blunttraumatic abdominal aortic injury. Ann Vasc Surg .
2016;30:34 –39.
4.Shalhub S, Starnes BW, Brenner ML, et al. Blunt
abdominal aortic injury: a Western Trauma Association
multicenter study. J Trauma Acute Care Surg . 2014;77:
879 –885; discussion 885.
5.Jacob-Brassard J, Salata K, Kayssi A, et al.
A systematic review of nonoperative management inblunt thoracic aortic injury. J Vasc Surg . 2019;70:1675 –
1681.e6.JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee377

6.Lee WA, Matsumura JS, Mitchell RS, et al. Endo-
vascular repair of traumatic thoracic aortic injury:clinical practice guidelines of the Society for VascularSurgery. J Vasc Surg . 2011;53:187 –192.
7.8.1. Long-Term Surveillance Imaging After
Aortic Dissection and IMH
1.Aizawa K, Kawahito K, Misawa Y. Long-term out-
comes of tear-oriented ascending/hemiarch re-placements for acute type A aortic dissection. Gen
Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2016;64:403 –408.
2.Bajona P, Quintana E, Schaff HV, et al. Aortic arch
surgery after previous type A dissection repair: resultsup to 5 years. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg . 2015;21:
81–85; discussion 85-86.
3.Kimura N, Itoh S, Yuri K, et al. Reoperation for
enlargement of the distal aorta after initial surgery foracute type A aortic dissection. J Thorac Cardiovasc
Surg. 2015;149(suppl 2):S91 –S98.e1.
4.Arafat A, Roselli EE, Idrees JJ, et al. Stent graft-
ing acute aortic dissection: comparison of DeBakey
extent IIIA versus IIIB. Ann Thorac Surg . 2016;102:
1473 –1481.
5.Stelzmueller ME, Nolz R, Mahr S, et al. Thoracic
endovascular repair for acute complicated type Baortic dissections. J Vasc Surg . 2019;69:318 –326.
6.Huang W, Yang F, Luo J, et al. Outcomes and
morphologic changes of immediate type IA endoleakfollowing endovascular repair of acute type B aorticdissection. Ann Vasc Surg . 2015;29:174 –182.
7.Akin I, Kische S, Rehders TC, et al. Thoracic endo-
vascular stent-graft therapy in aortic dissection. Curr
Opin Cardiol . 2010;25:552 –559.
8.Halstead JC, Meier M, Etz C, et al. The fate of the
distal aorta after repair of acute type A aortic dissec-
tion. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2007;133:127 –135.
9.Sievers HH, Richardt D, Diwoky M, et al. Survival
and reoperation after valve-sparing root replace-ment and root repair in acute type A dissection.J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2018;156:2076 –2082.
e2072.
10.Chiu P, Trojan J, Tsou S, et al. Limited root repair in
acute type A aortic dissection is safe but results in
increased risk of reoperation. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg .
2018;155:1 –7.e1.
11.The VIRTUE Registry Investigators. Mid-term out-
comes and aortic remodeling after thoracic endovas-cular repair for acute, subacute, and chronic aorticdissection: the VIRTUE Registry. Eur J Vasc Endovasc
Surg. 2014;48:363 –371.
12.Giles KA, Beck AW, Lala S, et al. Implications of
secondary aortic intervention after thoracic endovas-
cular aortic repair for acute and chronic type B
dissection.
J Vasc Surg . 2019;69:1367 –1378.
7.8.2. Long-Term Management After Acute
Aortic Dissection and IMH
1.Wang H, Wagner M, Benrashid E, et al. Outcomes of
reoperation after acute type A aortic dissection: im-plications for index repair strategy. J Am Heart Assoc .
2017;6:e006376.
2.Bajona P, Quintana E, Schaff HV, et al. Aortic arch
surgery after previous type A dissection repair: resultsup to 5 years. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg . 2015;21:
81–85; discussion 85-86.3.Malvindi PG, van Putte BP, Sonker U, et al. Reop-
eration after acute type A aortic dissection repair: aseries of 104 patients. Ann Thorac Surg . 2013;95:922 –
927.
4.Arafat A, Roselli EE, Idrees JJ, et al. Stent
grafting acute aortic dissection: comparison ofDeBakey extent IIIA versus IIIB. Ann Thorac Surg .
2016;102:1473 –1481.
7.8.3. Long-Term Management and Surveillance
for PAUs
1.Georgiadis GS, Antoniou GA, Georgakarakos EI, et al.
Surgical or endovascular therapy of abdominal pene-trating aortic ulcers and their natural history: a sys-
tematic review. J Vasc Interv Radiol . 2013;24:1437 –
1449.e1433.
2.Georgiadis GS, Trellopoulos G, Antoniou GA, et al.
Endovascular therapy for penetrating ulcers of theinfrarenal aorta. ANZ J Surg . 2013;83:758 –763.
3.D’Annoville T, Ozdemir BA, Alric P, et al. Thoracic
endovascular aortic repair for penetrating aortic ulcer:
literature review. Ann Thorac Surg . 2016;101:2272 –
2278.
4.Yang L, Zhang QY, Wang XZ, et al. Long-term im-
aging evolution and clinical prognosis among patientswith acute penetrating aortic ulcers: a retrospectiveobservational study. J Am Heart Assoc . 2020;9:
e014505.
5.Chou AS, Ziganshin BA, Charilaou P, et al. Long-term
behavior of aortic intramural hematomas and pene-trating ulcers. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2016;151:361 –
373.e1.
6.Cho KR, Stanson AW, Potter DD, et al. Penetrating
atherosclerotic ulcer of the descending thoracic aorta
and arch. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2004;127:1393 –
1399; discussion 1399-1401.
7.Nathan DP, Boonn W, Lai E, et al. Presentation, com-
plications, and natural history of penetrating athero-sclerotic ulcer disease. J Vasc Surg . 2012;55:10 –15.
8.Salim S, Locci R, Martin G, et al. Short- and long-
term outcomes in isolated penetrating aortic ulcerdisease. J Vasc Surg . 2020;72:84 –91.
8.1. Counseling and Management of Aortic Dis-
ease in Pregnancy and Postpartum
1.Roos-Hesselink JW, Budts W, Walker F, et al.
Organisation of care for pregnancy in patients with
congenital heart disease. Heart . 2017;103:1854 –1859.
2.Loeys BL, Schwarze U, Holm T, et al. Aneurysm
syndromes caused by mutations in the TGF-beta re-
ceptor. N Engl J Med . 2006;355:788 –798.
3.Murray ML, Pepin M, Peterson S, et al. Pregnancy-
related deaths and complications in women withvascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. Genet Med . 2014;16:
874–880.
4.Loeys BL, Dietz HC, Braverman AC, et al. The
revised Ghent nosology for the Marfan syndrome.J Med Genet . 2010;47:476 –485.
5.MacCarrick G, Black JH 3rd, Bowdin S, et al. Loeys-
Dietz syndrome: a primer for diagnosis and manage-ment. Genet Med . 2014;16:576 –587.
6.Roman MJ, Pugh NL, Hendershot TP, et al. Aortic
complications associated with pregnancy in Marfan
syndrome: the NHLBI National Registry of GeneticallyTriggered Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms andCardiovascular Conditions (GenTAC). J Am Heart Assoc .
2016;5:e004052.
7.Donnelly RT, Pinto NM, Kocolas I, et al. The imme-
diate and long-term impact of pregnancy on aorticgrowth rate and mortality in women with Marfansyndrome. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2012;60:224 –229.
8.Kuperstein R, Cahan T, Yoeli-Ullman R, et al. Risk of
aortic dissection in pregnant patients with the Marfan
syndrome. Am J Cardiol . 2017;119:132 –137.
9.Regitz-Zagrosek V, Roos-Hesselink JW,
Bauersachs J, et al. 2018 ESC guidelines for the man-agement of cardiovascular diseases during pregnancy.Eur Heart J . 2018;39:3165 –3241.
10.Cauldwell M, Steer PJ, Curtis S, et al. Maternal and
fetal outcomes in pregnancies complicated by theinherited aortopathy Loeys-Dietz syndrome. BJOG .
2019;126:1025 –1031.
11.Pyeritz RE. Maternal and fetal complications of
pregnancy in the Marfan syndrome. Am J Med . 1981;71:
784–790.
12.Silberbach M, Roos-Hesselink JW, Andersen NH,
et al. Cardiovascular health in Turner syndrome: ascienti ﬁc statement from the American Heart Associ-
ation. Circ Genom Precis Med . 2018;11:e000048.
13.Cauldwell M, Steer PJ, Curtis SL, et al. Maternal
and fetal outcomes in pregnancies complicated byMarfan syndrome. Heart . 2019;105:1725 –1731.
14.Campens L, Baris L, Scott NS, et al. Pregnancy
outcome in thoracic aortic disease data from the
Registry of Pregnancy and Cardiac Disease. Heart .
2021;107:1704 –1709.
15.Cauldwell M, Steer P, Sterrenburg M, et al. Birth
weight in pregnancies complicated by maternal heartdisease. Heart . 2019;105:391 –398.
16.Deleted in press.
17.Seely EW, Ecker J. Chronic hypertension in preg-
nancy. Circulation . 2014;129:1254 –1261.
18.Meijboom LJ, Vos FE, Timmermans J, et al.
Pregnancy and aortic root growth in the Marfansyndrome: a prospective study. Eur Heart J .
2005;26:914 –920.
19.Rossiter JP, Repke JT, Morales AJ, et al.
A prospective longitudinal evaluation of pregnancy in
the Marfan syndrome. Am J Obstet Gynecol . 1995;173:
1599 –1606.
20.Ray JG, Vermeulen MJ, Bharatha A, et al. Associ-
ation between MRI exposure during pregnancy andfetal and childhood outcomes. JAMA . 2016;316:952 –
961.
21.Chartier AL, Bouvier MJ, McPherson DR, et al. The
safety of maternal and fetal MRI at 3 T. AJR Am J
Roentgenol . 2019;213:1170 –1173.
22.Braverman AC, Mittauer E, Harris KM, et al.
Clinical features and outcomes of pregnancy-related
acute aortic dissection. JAMA Cardiol .2 0 2 1 ; 6 : 5 8 –
66.
23.Tran-Fadulu V, Pannu H, Kim DH, et al. Analysis of
multigenerational families with thoracic aortic aneu-
rysms and dissections due to TGFBR1 or TGFBR2 mu-tations. J Med Genet . 2009;46:607 –613.
24.Jondeau G, Ropers J, Regalado E, et al. Interna-
tional Registry of Patients Carrying TGFBR1 or TGFBR2Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e378

Mutations: results of the MAC (Montalcino Aortic
Consortium). Circ Cardiovasc Genet . 2016;9:548 –558.
25.Byers PH, Belmont J, Black J, et al. Diagnosis,
natural history, and management in vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med
Genet . 2017;175:40 –47.
26.Regalado ES, Guo DC, Estrera AL, et al. Acute aortic
dissections with pregnancy in women with ACTA2 mu-
tations. Am J Med Genet A . 2014;164:106 –112.
27.Wallace SE, Regalado ES, Gong L, et al. MYLK
pathogenic variants aortic disease presentation, preg-nancy risk, and characterization of pathogenicmissense variants. Genet Med . 2019;21:144 –151.
28.Carlson M, Silberbach M. Dissection of the aorta in
Turner syndrome: two cases and review of 85 cases inthe literature. J Med Genet . 2007;44:745 –749.
29.Immer FF, Bansi AG, Immer-Bansi AS, et al. Aortic
dissection in pregnancy: analysis of risk factors andoutcome. Ann Thorac Surg . 2003;76:309 –314.
30.Thakker PD, Braverman AC. Cardiogenetics: ge-
netic testing in the diagnosis and management of
patients with aortic disease. Heart . 2021;107:619 –
626.
31.Pinard A, Jones GT, Milewicz DM. Genetics of
thoracic and abdominal aortic diseases. Circ Res .
2019;124:588 –606.
32.Hostetler EM, Regalado ES, Guo DC, et al. SMAD3
pathogenic variants: risk for thoracic aortic disease andassociated complications from the Montalcino AorticConsortium. J Med Genet . 2019;56:252 –260.
33.van de Luijtgaarden KM, Bastos Gonçalves F,
Hoeks SE, et al. Higher 30 day mortality in patients
with familial abdominal aortic aneurysm after EVAR.
Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg . 2017;54:142 –149.
34.Shalhub S, Regalado ES, Guo DC, et al. The natural
history of type B aortic dissection in patients withPRKG1 mutation c.530G >A (p.Arg177Gln). J Vasc Surg .
2019;70:718 –723.
35.Whelton PK, Carey RM, Aronow WS, et al. 2017
ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/ AGS/APhA/ASH/ASPC/NMA/
PCNA guideline for the prevention, detection, evalua-
tion, and management of high blood pressure in
adults: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on ClinicalPractice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2018;71:e127 –
e248.
36.Doyle JJ, Doyle AJ, Wilson NK, et al. A deleterious
gene-by-environment interaction imposed by calciumchannel blockers in Marfan syndrome. Elife . 2015;4:
e08648.
8.2. Delivery in Pregnant Patients With
Aortopathy
1.Braverman AC, Mittauer E, Harris KM, et al. Clinical
features and outcomes of pregnancy-related acute
aortic dissection. JAMA Cardiol . 2021;6:58 –66.
2.Campens L, Baris L, Scott NS, et al. Pregnancy
outcome in thoracic aortic disease data from theRegistry of Pregnancy and Cardiac Disease. Heart .
2021;107:1704 –1709.
3.Pyeritz RE. Maternal and fetal complications of
pregnancy in the Marfan syndrome. Am J Med . 1981;71:
784–790.
4.Kamel H, Roman MJ, Pitcher A, et al. Pregnancy and
the risk of aortic dissection or rupture: a cohort-crossover analysis. Circulation . 2016;134:527 –533.5.Kuperstein R, Cahan T, Yoeli-Ullman R, et al. Risk of
aortic dissection in pregnant patients with the Marfansyndrome. Am J Cardiol . 2017;119:132 –137.
6.Roman MJ, Pugh NL, Hendershot TP, et al. Aortic
complications associated with pregnancy in Marfan
syndrome: the NHLBI National Registry of Genetically
Triggered Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms and Cardiovas-cular Conditions (GenTAC). J Am Heart Assoc . 2016;5:
e004052.
7.Meijboom LJ, Vos FE, Timmermans J, et al. Preg-
nancy and aortic root growth in the Marfan syndrome:a prospective study. Eur Heart J . 2005;26:914 –920.
8.Minsart AF, Mongeon FP, Laberge AM, et al. Ob-
stetric and cardiac outcomes in women with Marfan
syndrome and an aortic root diameter #45mm. Eur J
Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol . 2018;230:68 –72.
9.Regitz-Zagrosek V, Roos-Hesselink JW,
Bauersachs J, et al. 2018 ESC guidelines for the man-agement of cardiovascular diseases during pregnancy.Eur Heart J . 2018;39:3165 –3241.
10.Cauldwell M, Steer PJ, Curtis SL, et al. Maternal
and fetal outcomes in pregnancies complicated by
Marfan syndrome. Heart . 2019;105:1725 –1731.
11.Williams D, Lindley KJ, Russo M, et al. Pregnancy
after aortic root replacement in Marfan ’s syndrome: a
case series and review of the literature. AJP Rep .
2018;8:e234 –e240.
12.Braverman AC, Moon MR, Geraghty P, et al. Preg-
nancy after aortic root replacement in Loeys-Dietzsyndrome: high risk of aortic dissection. Am J Med
Genet A . 2016;170:2177 –2180.
13.
Loeys BL, Dietz HC, Braverman AC, et al. The
revised Ghent nosology for the Marfan syndrome.
J Med Genet . 2010;47:476 –485.
14.McNeilly G, Nicholl A, Broadway J, et al. Dural
ectasia in Marfan ’s syndrome: magnetic resonance
imaging appearances and anaesthetic experience ofthree deliveries. Int J Obstet Anesth . 2013;22:337 –339.
8.3. Surgery Before Pregnancy in Women With
Aortic Disease
1.Meijboom LJ, Vos FE, Timmermans J, et al. Preg-
nancy and aortic root growth in the Marfan syndrome:a prospective study. Eur Heart J . 2005;26:914 –920.
2.Minsart AF, Mongeon FP, Laberge AM, et al. Ob-
stetric and cardiac outcomes in women with Marfansyndrome and an aortic root diameter #45mm. Eur J
Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol . 2018;230:68 –72.
3.Campens L, Baris L, Scott NS, et al. Pregnancy
outcome in thoracic aortic disease data from the
Registry of Pregnancy and Cardiac Disease. Heart .
2021;107:1704 –1709.
4.Narula N, Devereux RB, Malonga GP, et al. Preg-
nancy-related aortic complications in women withMarfan syndrome. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2021;78:870 –
879.
5.Braverman AC, Mittauer E, Harris KM, et al.
Clinical features and outcomes of pregnancy-related
acute aortic dissection. JAMA Cardiol .2 0 2 1 ; 6 : 5 8 –
66.
6.Pyeritz RE. Maternal and fetal complications of
pregnancy in the Marfan syndrome. Am J Med . 1981;71:
784–790.
7.Roman MJ, Pugh NL, Hendershot TP, et al. Aortic
complications associated with pregnancy in Marfan
syndrome: the NHLBI National Registry of GeneticallyTriggered Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms and Cardiovas-
cular Conditions (GenTAC). J Am Heart Assoc . 2016;5:
e004052.
8.Erbel R, Aboyans V, Boileau C, et al. 2014 ESC
guidelines on the diagnosis and treatment of aortic
diseases: document covering acute and chronic aortic
diseases of the thoracic and abdominal aorta of theadult. The Task Force for the Diagnosis and Treatmentof Aortic Diseases of the European Society of Cardi-ology (ESC). Eur Heart J . 2014;35:2873 –2926.
9.Matura LA, Ho VB, Rosing DR, et al. Aortic dilatation
and dissection in Turner syndrome. Circulation .
2007;116:1663 –1670.
10.Silberbach M, Roos-Hesselink JW, Andersen NH,
et al. Cardiovascular health in Turner syndrome: ascienti ﬁc statement from the American Heart Associ-
ation. Circ Genom Precis Med . 2018;11:e000048.
11.Carlson M, Silberbach M. Dissection of the aorta in
Turner syndrome: two cases and review of 85 cases inthe literature. J Med Genet . 2007;44:745 –749.
12.Braverman AC, Moon MR, Geraghty P, et al. Preg-
nancy after aortic root replacement in Loeys-Dietz
syndrome: high risk of aortic dissection. Am J Med
Genet A . 2016;170:2177 –2180.
13.Williams D, Lindley KJ, Russo M, et al. Pregnancy
after aortic root replacement in Marfan ’s syndrome: a
case series and review of the literature. AJP Rep .
2018;8:e234 –e240.
14.Hiratzka LF, Bakris GL, Beckman JA, et al. 2010
ACCF/AHA/AATS/ACR/ASA/SCA/SCAI/SIR/STS/SVM
guidelines for the diagnosis and management of pa-tients with thoracic aortic disease: a report of theAmerican College of Cardiology Foundation/AmericanHeart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines,American Association for Thoracic Surgery, American
College of Radiology, American Stroke Association,
Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists, Societyfor Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions,Society of Interventional Radiology, Society ofThoracic Surgeons, and Society for Vascular Medicine.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2010;55:e27 –e129.
15.Loeys BL, Dietz HC, Braverman AC, et al. The
revised Ghent nosology for the Marfan syndrome.
J Med Genet . 2010;47:476 –485.
16.B o i l e a uC ,G u oD C ,H a n n aN ,e ta l .T G F B 2
mutations cause familial thoracic aortic aneurysmsand dissections associated with mild systemicfeatures of Marfan syndrome. Nat Genet .2 0 1 2 ; 4 4 :
916–921.
17.Marsili L, Overwater E, Hanna N, et al. Phenotypic
spectrum of TGFB3 disease-causing variants in a
Dutch-French cohort and ﬁrst report of a homozygous
patient. Clin Genet . 2020;97:723 –730.
18.Loeys BL, Schwarze U, Holm T, et al. Aneurysm
syndromes caused by mutations in the TGF-beta re-ceptor. N Engl J Med . 2006;355:788 –798.
19.Jondeau G, Ropers J, Regalado E, et al. Interna-
tional Registry of Patients Carrying TGFBR1 or
TGFBR2 Mutations: results of the MAC (Montalcino
Aortic Consortium). Circ Cardiovasc Genet . 2016;9:
548 –558.
20.van Hagen IM, van der Linde D, van de Laar IM,
et al. Pregnancy in women with SMAD3 mutation. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2017;69:1356 –1358.
21.Regalado ES, Guo DC, Estrera AL, et al. Acute
aortic dissections with pregnancy in women withJACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee379

ACTA2 mutations. Am J Med Genet A . 2014;164:106 –
112.
22.Wallace SE, Regalado ES, Gong L, et al. MYLK
pathogenic variants aortic disease presentation, preg-nancy risk, and characterization of pathogenicmissense variants. Genet Med . 2019;21:144 –151.
23.Shalhub S, Regalado ES, Guo DC, et al. The natural
history of type B aortic dissection in patients withPRKG1 mutation c.530G >A (p.Arg177Gln). J Vasc Surg .
2019;70:718 –723.
24.Milewicz DM, Regalado ES. Use of genetics for
personalized management of heritable thoracic aortic
disease: how do we get there? J Thorac Cardiovasc
Surg. 2015;149:S3 –S5.
25.Immer FF, Krähenbühl E, Hagen U, et al. Large area
of the false lumen favors secondary dilatation of theaorta after acute type A aortic dissection. Circulation .
2005;112:I249 –I252.
26.McKellar SH, MacDonald RJ, Michelena HI, et al.
Frequency of cardiovascular events in women with acongenitally bicuspid aortic valve in a single commu-nity and effect of pregnancy on events. Am J Cardiol .
2011;107:96 –99.
27.Wojnarski CM, Svensson LG, Roselli EE, et al. Aortic
dissection in patients with bicuspid aortic valve-
associated aneurysms. Ann Thorac Surg . 2015;100:
1666 –1673; discussion 1673-1674.
28.Regitz-Zagrosek V, Roos-Hesselink JW,
Bauersachs J, et al. 2018 ESC guidelines for the man-agement of cardiovascular diseases during pregnancy.Eur Heart J . 2018;39:3165 –3241.
29.Thakker PD, Braverman AC. Cardiogenetics: ge-
netic testing in the diagnosis and management of pa-tients with aortic disease. Heart . 2021;107:619 –626.
8.4. Pregnancy in Patients With Aortopathy:
Aortic Dissection and Aortic Surgery in
Pregnancy
1.Lansman SL, Goldberg JB, Kai M, et al. Aortic sur-
gery in pregnancy. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2017;153:
S44–S48.
2.Zhu JM, Ma WG, Peterss S, et al. Aortic dissection in
pregnancy: management strategy and outcomes. Ann
Thorac Surg . 2017;103:1199 –1206.
3.Yates MT, Soppa G, Smelt J, et al. Perioperative man-
agement and outcomes of aortic surgery during preg-nancy. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2015;149:607 –610.
4.Regitz-Zagrosek V, Roos-Hesselink JW,
Bauersachs J, et al. 2018 ESC guidelines for the man-agement of cardiovascular diseases during pregnancy.Eur Heart J . 2018;39:3165 –
3241.
5.Tadros RO, Tang GHL, Barnes HJ, et al. Optimal
treatment of uncomplicated type B aortic dissection:JACC review topic of the week. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2019;74:1494 –1504.
9.1. In ﬂammatory Aortitis: Diagnosis and
Treatment of Takayasu Arteritis and Giant Cell
Arteritis
1.Dejaco C, Ramiro S, Duftner C, et al. EULAR rec-
ommendations for the use of imaging in large vessel
vasculitis in clinical practice. Ann Rheum Dis . 2018;77:
636 –643.
2.Hauenstein C, Reinhard M, Geiger J, et al. Effects of
early corticosteroid treatment on magnetic resonanceimaging and ultrasonography ﬁndings in giant cell
arteritis. Rheumatology (Oxford) . 2012;51:1999 –2003.
3.Prieto-Gonzalez S, Arguis P, Garcia-Martinez A,
et al. Large vessel involvement in biopsy-proven giant
cell arteritis: prospective study in 40 newly diagnosed
patients using CT angiography. Ann Rheum Dis .
2012;71:1170 –1176.
4.Blockmans D, Stroobants S, Maes A, et al. Positron
emission tomography in giant cell arteritis and poly-
myalgia rheumatica: evidence for in ﬂammation of the
aortic arch. Am J Med . 2000;108:246 –249.
5.Lariviere D, Benali K, Coustet B, et al. Positron
emission tomography and computed tomographyangiography for the diagnosis of giant cell arteritis: areal-life prospective study. Medicine (Baltimore) .
2016;95:e4146.
6.Yamada I, Nakagawa T, Himeno Y, et al. Takayasu
arteritis: diagnosis with breath-hold contrast-enhanced three-dimensional MR angiography. J Magn
Reson Imaging . 2000;11:481 –487.
7.Hellmich B, Agueda A, Monti S, et al. 2018 update of
the EULAR recommendations for the management oflarge vessel vasculitis. Ann Rheum Dis . 2020;79:19 –30.
8.Mazlumzadeh M, Hunder GG, Easley KA, et al.
Treatment of giant cell arteritis using induction ther-apy with high-dose glucocorticoids: a double-blind,
placebo-controlled, randomized prospective clinical
trial. Arthritis Rheum . 2006;54:3310 –3318.
9.Chevalet P, Barrier JH, Pottier P, et al.
A randomized, multicenter, controlled trial usingintravenous pulses of methylprednisolone in the initialtreatment of simple forms of giant cell arteritis: a one
year followup study of 164 patients. J Rheumatol .
2000;27:1484 –1491.
10.Raine C, Stapleton PP, Merinopoulos D, et al. A 26-
week feasibility study comparing the ef ﬁcacy and
safety of modi ﬁ
ed-release prednisone with immediate-
release prednisolone in newly diagnosed cases of giant
cell arteritis. Int J Rheum Dis . 2018;21:285 –291.
11.Kyle V, Hazleman BL. Treatment of polymyalgia
rheumatica and giant cell arteritis. II. Relation betweensteroid dose and steroid associated side effects. Ann
Rheum Dis . 1989;48:662 –666.
12.Les I, Pijoan JI, Rodriguez-Alvarez R, et al. Effec-
tiveness and safety of medium-dose prednisone ingiant cell arteritis: a retrospective cohort study of 103patients. Clin Exp Rheumatol . 2015;33:S90 –S97.
13.Stone JH, Klearman M, Collinson N. Trial of tocili-
zumab in giant-cell arteritis. N Engl J Med . 2017;377:
1494 –1495.
14.Jover JA, Hernandez-Garcia C, Morado IC, et al.
Combined treatment of giant-cell arteritis with metho-trexate and prednisone. a randomized, double-blind, pla-cebo-controlled trial. A n nI n t e r nM e d . 2001;134:106 –114.
15.Misra DP, Rathore U, Patro P, et al. Disease-
modifying anti-rheumatic drugs for the managementof Takayasu arteritis-a systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin Rheumatol . 2021;40:4391 –4416.
16.Mekinian A, Comarmond C, Resche-Rigon M, et al.
Efﬁcacy of biological-targeted treatments in Takayasu
arteritis: multicenter, retrospective study of 49 pa-tients. Circulation . 2015;132:1693 –1700.
17.Reichenbach S, Adler S, Bonel H, et al. Magnetic
resonance angiography in giant cell arteritis: results of
a randomized controlled trial of tocilizumab in giantcell arteritis. Rheumatology (Oxford) . 2018;57:982 –
986.
18.Zerizer I, Tan K, Khan S, et al. Role of FDG-PET and
PET/CT in the diagnosis and management of vasculitis.
Eur J Radiol . 2010;73:504 –509.
19.Duftner C, Dejaco C, Sepriano A, et al. Imaging in
diagnosis, outcome prediction and monitoring of largevessel vasculitis: a systematic literature review andmeta-analysis informing the EULAR recommendations.RMD Open . 2018;4:e000612.
20.Blockmans D, de Ceuninck L, Vanderschueren S,
et al. Repetitive 18F- ﬂuorodeoxyglucose positron
emission tomography in giant cell arteritis: a prospectivestudy of 35 patients. Arthritis Rheum . 2006;55:131 –137.
21.Saadoun D, Lambert M, Mirault T, et al. Retro-
spective analysis of surgery versus endovascularintervention in Takayasu arteritis: a multicenter expe-rience. Circulation . 2012;125:813 –819.
22.Saadoun D, Vautier M, Cacoub P. Medium- and
large-vessel vasculitis. Circulation . 2021;143:267 –282.
23.Svensson LG, Arafat A, Roselli EE, et al. In ﬂ
am-
matory disease of the aorta: patterns and classi ﬁcation
of giant cell aortitis, Takayasu arteritis, and non-syndromic aortitis. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2015;149:
S170 –S175.
24.Nuenninghoff DM, Hunder GG, Christianson TJ,
et al. Incidence and predictors of large-arterycomplication (aortic aneurysm, aortic dissection, and/or large-artery stenosis) in patients with giant cellarteritis: a population-based study over 50 years.Arthritis Rheum . 2003;48:3522 –3531.
25.Martinez-Taboada VM, Lopez-Hoyos M, Narvaez J,
et al. Effect of antiplatelet/anticoagulant therapy onsevere ischemic complications in patients with giantcell arteritis: a cumulative meta-analysis. Autoimmun
Rev. 2014;13:788 –794.
26.Smith SC Jr, Allen J, Blair SN, et al. AHA/ACC
guidelines for secondary prevention for patients withcoronary and other atherosclerotic vascular disease:2006 update. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2006;47:2130 –2139.
27.Hiratzka LF, Bakris GL, Beckman JA, et al. 2010
ACCF/AHA/AATS/ACR/ASA/SCA/SCAI/SIR/STS/SVMguidelines for the diagnosis and management of pa-tients with thoracic aortic disease: a report of the
American College of Cardiology Foundation/American
Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines,American Association for Thoracic Surgery, AmericanCollege of Radiology, American Stroke Association,Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists, Societyfor Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions,
Society of Interventional Radiology, Society of
Thoracic Surgeons, and Society for Vascular Medicine.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2010;55:e27 –e129.
9.2.1. Diagnosis and Management of Infection of
t h eN a t i v eA o r t a
1.Vallejo N, Picardo NE, Bourke P, et al. The changing
management of primary mycotic aortic aneurysms.J Vasc Surg . 2011;54:334 –340.
2.Kan CD, Lee HL, Luo CY, et al. The ef ﬁcacy of aortic
stent grafts in the management of mycotic abdominalaortic aneurysm-institute case management with sys-temic literature comparison. Ann Vasc Surg . 2010;24:
433–440.
3.Sörelius K, Wanhainen A, Furebring M, et al.
Nationwide study of the treatment of mycoticIsselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e380

abdominal aortic aneurysms comparing open and
endovascular repair. Circulation . 2016;134:1822 –1832.
4.Sakalihasan N, Michel JB, Katsargyris A, et al.
Abdominal aortic aneurysms. Nat Rev Dis Primers .
2018;4:34.
5.Wilson WR, Bower TC, Creager MA, et al. Vascular
graft infections, mycotic aneurysms, and endovascularinfections: a scienti ﬁc statement from the American
Heart Association. Circulation . 2016;134:e412 –e460.
6.Muller BT, Wegener OR, Grabitz K, et al. Mycotic
aneurysms of the thoracic and abdominal aorta andiliac arteries: experience with anatomic and extra-anatomic repair in 33 cases. J Vasc Surg . 2001;33:
106–113.
7.Oz MC, Brener BJ, Buda JA, et al. A ten-year expe-
rience with bacterial aortitis. J Vasc Surg . 1989;10:
439 –449.
8.Cina CS, Arena GO, Fiture AO, et al. Ruptured
mycotic thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms: a reportof three cases and a systematic review. J Vasc Surg .
2001;33:861 –867.
9.Yu SY, Lee CH, Hsieh HC, et al. Treatment of primary
infected aortic aneurysm without aortic resection.J Vasc Surg . 2012;56:943 –950.
10.Weis-Muller BT, Rascanu C, Sagban A, et al. Single-
center experience with open surgical treatment of 36infected aneurysms of the thoracic, thoracoabdominal,and abdominal aorta. Ann Vasc Surg . 2011;25:1020 –
1025.
11.Baddour LM, Wilson WR, Bayer AS, et al. Infective
endocarditis in adults: diagnosis, antimicrobial ther-apy, and management of complications: a scienti ﬁc
statement for healthcare professionals from theAmerican Heart Association. Circulation . 2015;132:
1435 –1486.
9.2.2. Diagnosis and Management of Prosthetic
Aortic Graft Infection
1.Low RN, Wall SD, Jeffrey RB Jr, et al. Aortoenteric
ﬁstula and perigraft infection: evaluation with CT.
Radiology . 1990;175:157 –162.
2.Mark A, Moss AA, Lusby R, et al. CT evaluation of
complications of abdominal aortic surgery. Radiology .
1982;145:409 –414.
3.Fukuchi K, Ishida Y, Higashi M, et al. Detection of
aortic graft infection by ﬂuorodeoxyglucose positron
emission tomography: comparison with computedtomographic ﬁndings. J Vasc Surg . 2005;42:919 –925.
4.
Berger P, Vaartjes I, Scholtens A, et al. Differential
FDG-PET uptake patterns in uninfected and infectedcentral prosthetic vascular grafts. Eur J Vasc Endovasc
Surg. 2015;50:376 –383.
5.Sah BR, Husmann L, Mayer D, et al. Diagnostic
performance of 18F-FDG-PET/CT in vascular graft in-fections. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg . 2015;49:455 –464.
6.Shahidi S, Eskil A, Lundof E, et al. Detection of
abdominal aortic graft infection: comparison ofmagnetic resonance imaging and indium-labeledwhite blood cell scanning. Ann Vasc Surg . 2007;21:
586 –592.
7.O’Connor S, Andrew P, Batt M, et al. A systematic
review and meta-analysis of treatments for aortic graftinfection. J Vasc Surg . 2006;44:38 –45.
8.Reilly LM, Stoney RJ, Goldstone J, et al. Improved
management of aortic graft infection: the in ﬂuence ofoperation sequence and staging. J Vasc Surg . 1987;5:
421–431.
9.Clagett GP, Valentine RJ, Hagino RT. Autoge-
nous aortoiliac/femoral reconstruction from su-perﬁcial femoral-popliteal veins: feasibility and
durability. JV a s cS u r g . 1997;25:255 –266; discus-
sion 267-270.
10.Harlander-Locke MP, Harmon LK, Lawrence PF,
et al. The use of cryopreserved aortoiliac allograft foraortic reconstruction in the United States. J Vasc Surg .
2014;59:669 –674.
11.Kieffer E, Gomes D, Chiche L, et al. Allograft
replacement for infrarenal aortic graft infection: early
and late results in 179 patients. J Vasc Surg . 2004;39:
1009 –1017.
12.Oderich GS, Farber MA, Sanchez LA. Urgent endo-
vascular treatment of symptomatic or containedruptured aneurysms with modi ﬁed stent grafts. Per-
spect Vasc Surg Endovasc Ther . 2011;23:186 –194.
13.Kakkos SK, Bicknell CD, Tsolakis IA, et al. Editor ’s
choice –management of secondary aorto-enteric and
other abdominal arterio-enteric ﬁstulas: a review and
pooled data analysis. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg .
2016;52:770 –786.
14.Haidar GM, Hicks TD, Strosberg DS, et al. In situ"
endografting in the treatment of arterial and graftinfections. J Vasc Surg
. 2017;65:1824 –1829.
15.Plotkin A, Magee GA, Elsayed RS, et al. Methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus portends a poor
prognosis after endovascular repair of mycotic aortic
aneurysms and aortic graft infections. J Vasc Surg .
2020;72:276 –285.
16.Chiesa R, Astore D, Frigerio S, et al. Vascular
prosthetic graft infection: epidemiology, bacteriology,pathogenesis and treatment. Acta Chir Belg . 2002;102:
238–247.
17.Baddour LM, Wilson WR, Bayer AS, et al. Infective
endocarditis in adults: diagnosis, antimicrobial ther-
apy, and management of complications: a scienti ﬁc
statement for healthcare professionals from theAmerican Heart Association. Circulation . 2015;132:
1435 –1486.
18.Lau C, Gaudino M, de Biasi AR, et al. Outcomes of
open repair of mycotic descending thoracic and thor-acoabdominal aortic aneurysms. Ann Thorac Surg .
2015;100:1712 –1717.
19.Antonello RM, D ’Oria M, Cavallaro M, et al. Man-
agement of abdominal aortic prosthetic graft andendograft infections. A multidisciplinary update.J Infect Chemother . 2019;25:669 –680.
20.Hallett JW Jr, Marshall DM, Petterson TM, et al.
Graft-related complications after abdominal aorticaneurysm repair: reassurance from a 36-year
population-based experience. J Vasc Surg . 1997;25:
277–284; discussion 285-286.
21.Lehnert T, Gruber HP, Maeder N, et al. Manage-
ment of primary aortic graft infection by extra-
anatomic bypass reconstruction. Eur J Vasc Surg .
1993;7:301 –307.
22.Vogel TR, Symons R, Flum DR. The incidence and
factors associated with graft infection after aorticaneurysm repair. J Vasc Surg . 2008;47:264 –269.
23.Schermerhorn ML, O ’Malley AJ, Jhaveri A, et al.
Endovascular vs. open repair of abdominal aorticaneurysms in the Medicare population. N Engl J Med .
2008;358:464 –474.
24.Hobo R, Buth J, EUROSTAR collaborators. Sec-
ondary interventions following endovascular abdom-inal aortic aneurysm repair using current endografts. AEUROSTAR report. J Vasc Surg . 2006;43:896 –902.e1.
25.EVAR Trial Participants. Endovascular aneurysm
repair versus open repair in patients with abdominal
aortic aneurysm (EVAR trial 1): randomised controlledtrial. Lancet . 2005;365:2179 –
2186.
26.Oderich GS, Bower TC, Hofer J, et al. In situ
rifampin-soaked grafts with omental coverage and
antibiotic suppression are durable with low reinfectionrates in patients with aortic graft enteric erosion orﬁstula. J Vasc Surg . 2011;53:99 –106, 107.e1-7; dis-
cussion 106-107.
27.Janko MR, Woo K, Hacker RI, et al. In situ bypass
and extra-anatomic bypass procedures result in similarsurvival in patients with secondary aortoenteric ﬁs-
tulas. J Vasc Surg . 2021;73:210 –221.e1.
28.Bandyk DF, Novotney ML, Back MR, et al.
Expanded application of in situ replacement for pros-thetic graft infection. J Vasc Surg . 2001;34:411 –419;
discussion 419-420.
9.3. Atherosclerotic Disease1.Agmon Y, Khandheria BK, Meissner I, et al. Relation
of coronary artery disease and cerebrovascular diseasewith atherosclerosis of the thoracic aorta in the gen-eral population. Am J Cardiol . 2002;89:262 –267.
2.Caron F, Anand SS. Antithrombotic therapy in aortic
diseases: a narrative review. Vasc Med . 2017;22:57 –65.
3.Jones WS, Mulder H, Wruck LM, et al. Comparative
effectiveness of aspirin dosing in cardiovascular dis-
ease. N Engl J Med . 2021;384:1981 –1990.
4.Tunick PA, Rosenzweig BP, Katz ES, et al. High risk
for vascular events in patients with protruding aorticatheromas: a prospective study. J Am Coll Cardiol .
1994;23:1085 –1090.
5.Plehn JF, Davis BR, Sacks FM, et al. Reduction of
stroke incidence after myocardial infarction with pra-vastatin: the Cholesterol and Recurrent Events (CARE)
study. The Care Investigators. Circulation . 1999;99:
216–223.
6.Yusuf S, Hawken S, Ounpuu S, et al. Effect of
potentially modi ﬁable risk factors associated with
myocardial infarction in 52 countries (the INTERHEART
study): case-control study. Lancet . 2004;364:937 –
952.
7.Amarenco P, Cohen A, Tzourio C, et al. Atheroscle-
rotic disease of the aortic arch and the risk of ischemic
stroke. N Engl J Med . 1994;331:1474 –1479.
8.Tunick PA, Nayar AC, Goodkin GM, et al. Effect of
treatment on the incidence of stroke and other emboliin 519 patients with severe thoracic aortic plaque. Am J
Cardiol . 2002;90:1320 –1325.
9.Butler CG, Ho Luxford JM, Huang CC, et al. Aortic
atheroma increases the risk of long-term mortality in20,000 patients. Ann Thorac Surg . 2017;104:1325 –
1331.
10.McMahan CA, Gidding SS, Fayad ZA, et al. Risk
scores predict atherosclerotic lesions in young people.Arch Intern Med . 2005;165:883 –890.
11.Stary HC, Chandler AB, Dinsmore RE, et al.
Ad e ﬁnition of advanced types of atheroscleroticJACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee381

lesions and a histological classi ﬁcation of atheroscle-
rosis. A report from the Committee on Vascular Lesionsof the Council on Arteriosclerosis, American HeartAssociation. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol . 1995;15:
1512 –1531.
12.Karalis DG, Chandrasekaran K, Victor MF, et al.
Recognition and embolic potential of intraaortic
atherosclerotic debris. JA mC o l lC a r d i o l . 1991;17:73 –78.
13.Jones EF, Kalman JM, Cala ﬁore P, et al. Proximal
aortic atheroma. An independent risk factor for cere-bral ischemia. Stroke . 1995;26:218 –224.
14.Khatibzadeh M, Mitusch R, Stierle U, et al. Aortic
atherosclerotic plaques as a source of systemic em-bolism. J Am Coll Cardiol . 1996;27:664 –669.
15.Mitusch R, Doherty C, Wucherpfennig H, et al.
Vascular events during follow-up in patients withaortic arch atherosclerosis. Stroke . 1997;28:36 –39.
16.Kronzon I, Tunick PA. Aortic atherosclerotic disease
and stroke. Circulation . 2006;114:63 –75.
17.Qvist I, Søgaard R, Lindholt JS, et al. Adherence to
prescribed drugs among 65-74 year old men diag-
nosed with abdominal aortic aneurysm or peripheralarterial disease in a screening trial: a VIVA substudy.Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg . 2019;57:442 –450.
18.Phrommintikul A, Krittayaphong R,
Wongcharoen W, et al. Management of atherosclerosisrisk factors for patients at high cardiovascular risk inreal-world practice: a multicentre study. Singapore
Med J . 2017;58:535 –542.
9.3.1. Aortic Thrombus
1.Yang S, Yu J, Zeng W, et al. Aortic ﬂoating thrombus
detected by computed tomography angiography inci-dentally: ﬁve cases and a literature review. J Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg . 2017;153:791 –803.
2.Caron F, Anand SS. Antithrombotic therapy in aortic
diseases: a narrative review. Vasc Med . 2017;22:57 –65.
3.Fayad ZY, Semaan E, Fahoum B, et al. Aortic mural
thrombus in the normal or minimally atheroscleroticaorta. Ann Vasc Surg . 2013;27:282 –290.
4.Arima T, Muroya K, Kawamoto K, et al. Aortic
thrombosis in a patient with malignant disease: a
literature review and case presentation. Vasc Endo-
vascular Surg . 2019;53:139 –144.
5.Morris ME, Galiñanes EL, Nichols WK, et al. Thoracic
mural thrombi: a case series and literature review.
Ann
Vasc Surg . 2011;25:1140.e1117 –1140.e1121.
6.Kadoya Y, Zen K, Oda Y, et al. Successful endovas-
cular treatment for aortic thrombosis due to primaryantiphospholipid syndrome: a case report and litera-ture review. Vasc Endovascular Surg . 2019;53:51 –57.
7.Meyermann K, Trani J, Caputo FJ, et al. Descending
thoracic aortic mural thrombus presentation andtreatment strategies. J Vasc Surg . 2017;66:931 –936.
8.Barbato VA, Castro R, Goertz A. Case report and
review of the literature: ﬂoating aortic thrombus. Am J
Med. 2014;127:e3 –e4.
9.Goldstein SA, Evangelista A, Abbara S, et al. Mul-
timodality imaging of diseases of the thoracic aorta inadults: from the American Society of Echocardiogra-phy and the European Association of CardiovascularImaging. J Am Soc Echocardiogr . 2015;28:119 –182.
10.Bowdish ME, Weaver FA, Liebman HA, et al. Anti-
coagulation is an effective treatment for aortic mural
thrombi. J Vasc Surg . 2002;36:713 –719.11.Verma S, Siu SC. Aortic dilatation in patients with
bicuspid aortic valve. NE n g lJM e d . 2014;370:1920 –1929.
9.3.2. Aortic Occlusion
1.Grip O, Wanhainen A, Björck M. Acute aortic occlu-
sion. Circulation . 2019;139:292 –294.
2.Fang L, Lai Z, Qiu C, et al. Endovascular treatment for
infrarenal aortic occlusion: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann Vasc Surg . 2020;62:432 –441.e13.
3.Mayor J, Branco BC, Chung J, et al. Outcome com-
parison between open and endovascular managementof TASC II D aortoiliac occlusive disease. Ann Vasc Surg .
2019;61:65 –71.e3.
9.3.3. Porcelain Aorta1.Eisen A, Tenenbaum A, Koren-Morag N, et al.
Calciﬁcation of the thoracic aorta as detected by spiral
computed tomography among stable angina pectorispatients: association with cardiovascular events and
death. Circulation . 2008;118:1328 –1334.
2.Mills NL, Everson CT. Atherosclerosis of the
ascending aorta and coronary artery bypass. Pathol-ogy, clinical correlates, and operative management.J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 1991;102:546 –553.
3.Lev-Ran O, Ben-Gal Y, Matsa M, et al. ’No touch ’
techniques for porcelain ascending aorta: comparison
between cardiopulmonary bypass with femoral artery
cannulation and off-pump myocardial revasculariza-tion. J Card Surg . 2002;17:370
–376.
4.Sirin G, Sarkislali K, Konakci M, et al. Extra-
anatomical coronary artery bypass grafting in patientswith severely atherosclerotic (porcelain) aorta.J Cardiothorac Surg . 2013;8:86.
5.Greelish JP, Soltesz EG, Byrne JG. Valve surgery in
octogenarians with a "porcelain" aorta and aorticinsufﬁciency. J Card Surg . 2002;17:285 –288.
6.Girardi LN, Krieger KH, Mack CA, et al. No-clamp
technique for valve repair or replacement in patientswith a porcelain aorta. Ann Thorac Surg . 2005;80:
1688 –1692.
9.4. Coarctation of the Aorta (CoA) and
Congenital Abnormalities of the Arch
1.Hoffman JI, Kaplan S. The incidence of congenital
heart disease. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2002;39:1890 –1900.
2.Muzzarelli S, Meadows AK, Ordovas KG, et al. Use-
fulness of cardiovascular magnetic resonance imagingto predict the need for intervention in patients withcoarctation of the aorta. Am J Cardiol . 2012;109:861 –
865.
3.Teo LL, Cannell T, Babu-Narayan SV, et al. Preva-
lence of associated cardiovascular abnormalities in500 patients with aortic coarctation referred for car-diovascular magnetic resonance imaging to a tertiarycenter. Pediatr Cardiol . 2011;32:1120 –1127.
4.Attenhofer Jost CH, Schaff HV, Connolly HM, et al.
Spectrum of reoperations after repair of aortic coarc-
tation: importance of an individualized approachbecause of coexistent cardiovascular disease. Mayo
Clin Proc . 2002;77:646 –653.
5.Erben Y, Oderich GS, Verhagen HJM, et al. Multicenter
experience with endovascular treatment of aortic
coarctation in adults. J Vasc Surg . 2019;69:671 –679.e1.
6.Stout KK, Daniels CJ, Aboulhosn JA, et al. 2018
AHA/ACC guideline for the management of adults withcongenital heart disease: a report of the American
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association TaskForce on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2019;73:e81 –e192.
7.Carr JA. The results of catheter-based therapy
compared with surgical repair of adult aortic
coarctation. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2006;47:1101 –1107.
8.Lala S, Scali ST, Feezor RJ, et al. Outcomes of
thoracic endovascular aortic repair in adult coarctationpatients. J Vasc Surg . 2018;67:369 –381.e2.
9.Meadows J, Minahan M, McElhinney DB, et al. In-
termediate outcomes in the prospective, multicenterCoarctation of the Aorta Stent Trial (COAST). Circula-
tion. 2015;131:1656 –1664.
10.Roselli EE, Qureshi A, Idrees J, et al. Open,
hybrid, and endovascular treatment for aortic
coarctation and postrepair aneurysm in adolescents
and adults.
Ann Thorac Surg . 2012;94:751 –756; dis-
cussion 757-758.
11.Taggart NW, Minahan M, Cabalka AK, et al. Imme-
diate outcomes of covered stent placement for treat-ment or prevention of aortic wall injury associatedwith coarctation of the aorta (COAST II). J Am Coll
Cardiol Intv. 2016;9:484 –493.
12.Egbe AC, Miranda WR, Bonnichsen CR, et al. Po-
tential bene ﬁts of ambulatory blood pressure moni-
toring in coarctation of aorta. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2020;75:2089 –2090.
13.Meijs TA, Warmerdam EG, Slieker MG, et al. Me-
dium-term systemic blood pressure after stenting ofaortic coarctation: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Heart . 2019;105:1464 –1470.
14.Puranik R, Tsang VT, Puranik S, et al. Late magnetic
resonance surveillance of repaired coarctation of the
aorta. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg . 2009;36:91 –95; dis-
cussion 95.
15.Karangelis D, Loggos S, Tzifa A, et al. The aberrant
subclavian artery: approach to management. Curr Opin
Cardiol . 2020;35:636 –642.
16.Plotkin A, Ng B, Han SM, et al. Association of
aberrant subclavian arteries with aortic pathology andproposed classi ﬁcation system. J Vasc Surg . 2020;72:
1534 –1543.
17.Priya S, Thomas R, Nagpal P, et al. Congenital
anomalies of the aortic arch. Cardiovasc Diagn Ther .
2018;8(suppl 1):S26 –S44.
18.Tanaka A, Milner R, Ota T. Kommerell ’s divertic-
ulum in the current era: a comprehensive review. Gen
Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2015;63:245 –259.
19.Kim KM, Cambria RP, Isselbacher EM, et al.
Contemporary surgical approaches and outcomes in
adults with Kommerell diverticulum. Ann Thorac Surg .
2014;98:1347 –1354.
20.Kouchoukos NT, Masetti P. Aberrant subclavian
artery and Kommerell aneurysm: surgical treatmentwith a standard approach. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg .
2007;133:888 –892.
9.4.1. Coarctation of the Aorta
1.Brown ML, Burkhart HM, Connolly HM, et al.
Coarctation of the aorta: lifelong surveillance is
mandatory following surgical repair. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2013;62:1020
–1025.
2.Erben Y, Oderich GS, Verhagen HJM, et al. Multi-
center experience with endovascular treatment ofIsselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e382

aortic coarctation in adults. J Vasc Surg . 2019;69:671 –
679.e1.
3.Meadows J, Minahan M, McElhinney DB, et al. In-
termediate outcomes in the prospective, multicenterCoarctation of the Aorta Stent Trial (COAST). Circula-
tion. 2015;131:1656 –1664.
4.Teo LL, Cannell T, Babu-Narayan SV, et al. Preva-
lence of associated cardiovascular abnormalities in500 patients with aortic coarctation referred for car-
diovascular magnetic resonance imaging to a tertiary
center. Pediatr Cardiol . 2011;32:1120 –1127.
5.Carr JA. The results of catheter-based therapy
compared with surgical repair of adult aortic coarcta-tion. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2006;47:1101 –1107.
6.Hager A, Kanz S, Kaemmerer H, et al. Coarctation
Long-term Assessment (COALA): signi ﬁcance of arte-
rial hypertension in a cohort of 404 patients up to 27years after surgical repair of isolated coarctation of theaorta, even in the absence of restenosis and prostheticmaterial. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2007;134:738 –745.
7.Holzer R, Qureshi S, Ghasemi A, et al. Stenting of
aortic coarctation: acute, intermediate, and long-termresults of a prospective multi-institutional registry —
Congenital Cardiovascular Interventional Study Con-
sortium (CCISC). Catheter Cardiovasc Interv . 2010;76:
553–563.
8.Kaushal S, Backer CL, Patel JN, et al. Coarctation of
the aorta: midterm outcomes of resection withextended end-to-end anastomosis. Ann Thorac Surg .
2009;88:1932 –1938.
9.Lala S, Scali ST, Feezor RJ, et al. Outcomes of
thoracic endovascular aortic repair in adult coarctationpatients. J Vasc Surg . 2018;67:369 –381.e2.
10.Sohrabi B, Jamshidi P, Yaghoubi A, et al. Compar-
ison between covered and bare Cheatham-Platinumstents for endovascular treatment of patients with
native post-ductal aortic coarctation: immediate and
intermediate-term results. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv .
2014;7:416 –423.
11.Stout KK, Daniels CJ, Aboulhosn JA, et al. 2018
AHA/ACC guideline for the management of adults withcongenital heart disease: a report of the AmericanCollege of Cardiology/American Heart Association TaskForce on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2019;73:e81 –e192.
12.Taggart NW, Minahan M, Cabalka AK, et al. Im-
mediate outcomes of covered stent placement for
treatment or prevention of aortic wall injury associated
with coarctation of the aorta (COAST II). J Am Coll
Cardiol Intv . 2016;9:484 –493.
13.Whelton PK, Carey RM, Aronow WS, et al. 2017
ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/ AGS/APhA/ASH/ASPC/NMA/
PCNA guideline for the prevention, detection, evalua-tion, and management of high blood pressure in adults:a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Prac-
tice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2018;71:e127
–e248.
14.Connolly HM, Huston J 3rd, Brown RD Jr, et al. Intra-
cranial aneurysms in patients with coarctation of the aorta:
a prospective magnetic resonance angiographic study of
100 patients. Mayo Clin Proc . 2003;78:1491 –1499.
15.Cook SC, Hickey J, Maul TM, et al. Assessment of
the cerebral circulation in adults with coarctation ofthe aorta. Congenit Heart Dis . 2013;8:289 –295.
16.Curtis SL, Bradley M, Wilde P, et al. Results of
screening for intracranial aneurysms in patients withcoarctation of the aorta. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol .
2012;33:1182 –1186.
17.Pickard SS, Prakash A, Newburger JW, et al.
Screening for intracranial aneurysms in coarctation of
the aorta: a decision and cost-effectiveness analysis.Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes . 2020;13:e006406.
18.Andrade L, Hoskoppal A, Hunt Martin M, et al.
Intracranial aneurysm and coarctation of the aorta:
prevalence in the current era. Cardiol Young . 2021;31:
229–232.
19.Attenhofer Jost CH, Schaff HV, Connolly HM, et al.
Spectrum of reoperations after repair of aortic coarc-
tation: importance of an individualized approach
because of coexistent cardiovascular disease. Mayo
Clin Proc . 2002;77:646 –653.
20.Oliver JM, Alonso-Gonzalez R, Gonzalez AE, et al.
Risk of aortic root or ascending aorta complications in
patients with bicuspid aortic valve with and without
coarctation of the aorta. Am J Cardiol . 2009;104:
1001 –1006.
21.Fawzy ME, Fathala A, Osman A, et al. Twenty-two
years of follow-up results of balloon angioplasty for
discreet native coarctation of the aorta in adolescents
and adults. Am Heart J . 2008;156:910 –917.
22.Egbe AC, Miranda WR, Bonnichsen CR, et al. Po-
tential bene ﬁts of ambulatory blood pressure moni-
toring in coarctation of aorta. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2020;75:2089 –2090.
23.Luitingh TL, Lee MGY, Jones B, et al. A cross-
sectional study of the prevalence of exercise-inducedhypertension in childhood following repair of coarc-
tation of the aorta. Heart Lung Circ . 2019;28:792 –799.
24.Meijs TA, Warmerdam EG, Slieker MG, et al. Me-
dium-term systemic blood pressure after stenting ofaortic coarctation: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Heart . 2019;105:1464 –1470.
25.Muzzarelli S, Meadows AK, Ordovas KG, et al.
Usefulness of cardiovascular magnetic resonance im-aging to predict the need for intervention in patientswith coarctation of the aorta. Am J Cardiol . 2012;109:
861–865.
26.Preventza O, Livesay JJ, Cooley DA, et al. Coarc-
tation-associated aneurysms: a localized disease ordiffuse aortopathy. Ann Thorac Surg . 2013;95:1961 –
1967; discussion 1967.
27.Therrien J, Thorne SA, Wright A, et al. Repaired
coarctation: a "cost-effective" approach to identifycomplications in adults. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2000;35:
997 –1002.
28.Erbel R, Aboyans V, Boileau C, et al. 2014 ESC
guidelines on the diagnosis and treatment of aorticdiseases: document covering acute and chronic aorticdiseases of the thoracic and abdominal aorta of theadult. The Task Force for the Diagnosis and Treatmentof Aortic Diseases of the European Society of Cardi-
ology (ESC). Eur Heart J . 2014;35:2873 –2926.
29.Roselli EE, Qureshi A, Idrees J, et al. Open, hybrid,
and endovascular treatment for aortic coarctation andpostrepair aneurysm in adolescents and adults. Ann
Thorac Surg . 2012;94:751 –756; discussion 757-758.
30.Kim YY, Andrade L, Cook SC. Aortic coarctation.
Cardiol Clin . 2020;38:337 –351.
9.4.2.1. ASCA, Kommerell ’s Diverticulum
1.Dumfarth J, Chou AS, Ziganshin BA, et al. Atypical
aortic arch branching variants: a novel marker forthoracic aortic disease. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg .
2015;149:1586 –1592.
2.Yousef S, Singh S, Alkukhun A, et al. Variants of the
aortic arch in adult general population and their as-sociation with thoracic aortic aneurysm disease. J Card
Surg. 2021;36:2348 –2354.
3.Tanaka A, Milner R, Ota T. Kommerell ’s diverticulum
in the current era: a comprehensive review. Gen Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg . 2015;63:245 –259.
4.Upchurch GR Jr, Escobar GA, Azizzdeh A, et al. So-
ciety for Vascular Surgery clinical practice guidelines ofthoracic endovascular aortic repair for descendingthoracic aortic aneurysms. J Vasc Surg . 2021;73:55S –
83S.
5.Vinnakota A, Idrees JJ, Rosinski BF, et al. Outcomes
of repair of Kommerell Diverticulum. Ann Thorac Surg.
2019;108:1745 –1750.
6.Idrees J, Arafat A, Svensson LG, et al. Hybrid repair
of aortic aneurysm in patients with previous coarcta-
tion. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2014;148:60 –64.
7.Czerny M, Schmidli J, Adler S, et al. Editor ’s
choice —current options and recommendations for
the treatment of thoracic aortic pathologiesinvolving the aortic arch: an expert consensusdocument of the European Association for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery (EACTS) & the European Societyf o rV a s c u l a rS u r g e r y( E S V S ) . Eur J Vasc Endovasc
Surg . 2019;57:165 –198.
8.Erben Y, Brownstein AJ, Velasquez CA, et al. Natural
history and management of Kommerell ’s diverticulum
in a single tertiary referral center. J Vasc Surg .
2020;71:2004 –2011.
9.4.2.2. Aberrant Left Vertebral Artery Origin
1.Magklara EP, Pantelia ET, Solia E, et al. Vertebral
artery variations revised: origin, course, branches and
embryonic development. Folia Morphol (Warsz) .
2021;80:1 –12.
2.Rylski B, Schofer F, Beyersdorf F, et al. Aortic
arch anatomy in candidates for aortic arch repair.Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2021. S1043-0679:
00113-1.
3.Rangel-Castilla L, Kalani MY, Cronk K, et al. Verte-
bral artery transposition for revascularization of theposterior circulation: a critical assessment of tempo-rary and permanent complications and outcomes.
J Neurosurg . 2015;122:671 –677.
4.Suzuki K, Kazui T, Bashar AH, et al. Total aortic arch
replacement in patients with arch vessel anomalies.
Ann Thorac Surg . 2006;81:2079 –2083.
5.Cooper DG, Walsh SR, Sadat U, et al. Neurological
complications after left subclavian artery coverageduring thoracic endovascular aortic repair: a system-atic review and meta-analysis. J Vasc Surg . 2009;49:
1594 –1601.
6.Buth J, Harris PL, Hobo R, et al. Neurologic com-
plications associated with endovascular repair of
thoracic aortic pathology: Incidence and risk factors. astudy from the European Collaborators on Stent/GraftTechniques for Aortic Aneurysm Repair (EUROSTAR)registry. J Vasc Surg . 2007;46:1103 –1110; discussion
1110-1111.
7.Waterford SD, Chou D, Bombien R, et al. Left sub-
clavian arterial coverage and stroke during thoracic
aortic endografting: a systematic review. Ann Thorac
Surg. 2016;101:381 –389.JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee383

8.von Allmen RS, Gahl B, Powell JT. Editor ’s
choice –incidence of stroke following thoracic
endovascular aortic repair for descending aorticaneurysm: a systematic review of the literature
with meta-analysis. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg .
2017;53:176 –184.
9.4.2.3. Bovine Arch (Common Innominate and
Left Carotid Artery)
1.Hornick M, Moomiaie R, Mojibian H, et al. Bovine ’
aortic arch - a marker for thoracic aortic disease. Car-
diology . 2012;123:116 –124.
2.Wanamaker KM, Amadi CC, Mueller JS, et al. Inci-
dence of aortic arch anomalies in patients with thoracicaortic dissections. J Card Surg . 2013;28:151 –154.
3.Marrocco-Trischitta MM, Alaidroos M,
Romarowski RM, et al. Aortic arch variant with acommon origin of the innominate and left carotid ar-tery as a determinant of thoracic aortic disease: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur J Car-
diothorac Surg . 2020;57:422 –427.
4.Berko NS, Jain VR, Godelman A, et al. Variants and
anomalies of thoracic vasculature on computedtomographic angiography in adults. J Comput Assist
Tomogr . 2009;33:523 –528.
5.Layton KF, Kallmes DF, Cloft HJ, et al. Bovine aortic
arch variant in humans: clari ﬁcation of a common
misnomer. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol . 2006;27:1541 –
1542.
6.Ye W, Zheng C, Yu D, et al. Lipoxin A4 ameliorates
acute pancreatitis-associated acute lung injury through
the antioxidative and anti-in ﬂammatory effects of the
Nrf2 pathway. Oxid Med Cell Longev . 2019;2019:
2197017.
7.Dumfarth J, Peterss S, Ko ﬂer M, et al. In DeBakey
type I aortic dissection, bovine aortic arch is associatedwith arch tears and stroke. Ann Thorac Surg . 2017;104:
2001 –2008.
9.5. Tumors
1.Diaconu R, Florescu R, Cornelissen A, et al. An un-
usual case of aortic metastasis from lung cancer. Dis-
coveries (Craiova) . 2020;8:e106.
2.Lloyd C, Silvestri GA. Mediastinal staging of non-
small-cell lung cancer. Cancer Control . 2001;8:311 –
317.
3.R u s t h o v e nC G ,L i uA K ,B u iM M ,e ta l .S a r c o m a so f
the aorta: a systematic review and pooled analysisof published reports. Ann Vasc Surg .2 0 1 4 ; 2 8 : 5 1 5 –
525.
4.
Fatima J, Duncan AA, Maleszewski JJ, et al. Primary
angiosarcoma of the aorta, great vessels, and the
heart. J Vasc Surg . 2013;57:756 –764.
5.Böhner H, Luther B, Braunstein S, et al. Primary
malignant tumors of the aorta: clinical presentation,
treatment, and course of different entities. J Vasc Surg .
2003;38:1430 –1433.
6.Vacirca A, Faggioli G, Pini R, et al. Predictors of
survival in malignant aortic tumors. J Vasc Surg .
2018;67:e100.
7.Chiche L, Mongrédien B, Brocheriou I, et al. Primary
tumors of the thoracoabdominal aorta: surgical treat-ment of 5 patients and review of the literature. Ann
Vasc Surg . 2003;17:354 –364.
8.Salm R. Primary ﬁbrosarcoma of aorta. Cancer .
1972;29:73 –83.9.Bendel EC, Maleszewski JJ, Araoz PA. Imaging sar-
comas of the great vessels and heart. Semin Ultrasound
CT MR . 2011;32:377 –404.
10.von Falck C, Meyer B, Fegbeutel C, et al. Imaging
features of primary sarcomas of the great vessels in
CT, MRI and PET/CT: a single-center experience. BMC
Med Imaging . 2013;13:25.
10. Physical Activity and Quality of Life
1.Erbel R, Aboyans V, Boileau C, et al. 2014 ESC
guidelines on the diagnosis and treatment of aorticdiseases: document covering acute and chronic aortic
diseases of the thoracic and abdominal aorta of the
adult. The Task Force for the Diagnosis and Treatmentof Aortic Diseases of the European Society of Cardi-ology (ESC). Eur Heart J . 2014;35:2873 –2926.
2.Thijssen CGE, Bons LR, Gökalp AL, et al. Exercise
and sports participation in patients with thoracic aorticdisease: a review. Expert Rev Cardiovasc Ther . 2019;17:
251–266.
3.Fuglsang S, Heiberg J, Hjortdal VE, et al. Exercise-
based cardiac rehabilitation in surgically treated type-A aortic dissection patients. Scand Cardiovasc J .
2017;51:99 –105.
4.Hornsby WE, Norton EL, Fink S, et al. Cardio-
pulmonary exercise testing following open repair
for a proximal thoracic aortic aneurysm or
dissection. J Cardiopulm Rehabil Prev .2 0 2 0 ; 4 0 :
108 –115.
5.Chaddha A, Eagle KA, Braverman AC, et al. Exercise
and physical activity for the post-aortic dissectionpatient: the clinician ’s conundrum. Clin Cardiol .
2015;38:647 –651.
6.
Chaddha A, Kline-Rogers E, Woznicki EM, et al.
Cardiology patient page. Activity recommendations forpostaortic dissection patients. Circulation . 2014;130:
e140 –e142.
7.Franke UFW, Isecke A, Nagib R, et al. Quality of life
after aortic root surgery: reimplantation techniqueversus composite replacement. Ann Thorac Surg .
2010;90:1869 –1875.
8.Pasadyn SR, Roselli EE, Artis AS, et al. From tear to
fear: posttraumatic stress disorder in patients withacute type A aortic dissection. J Am Heart Assoc .
2020;9:e015060.
9.Chaddha A, Kline-Rogers E, Braverman AC, et al.
Survivors of aortic dissection: activity, mentalhealth, and sexual function. Clin Cardiol .2 0 1 5 ; 3 8 :
652 –659.
10.Coughlin PA, Jackson D, White AD, et al. Meta-
analysis of prospective trials determining the short-and mid-term effect of elective open and endovascularrepair of abdominal aortic aneurysms on quality of life.Br J Surg . 2013;100:448 –455.
11.Lohse F, Lang N, Schiller W, et al. Quality of life
after replacement of the ascending aorta in patients
with true aneurysms. Tex Heart Inst J . 2009;36:104 –
110.
12.de Heer F, Gokalp AL, Kluin J, et al.
Measuring what matters to the patient: healthrelated quality of life after aortic valve andthoracic aortic surgery. Gen Thorac Cardiovasc
Surg . 2019;67:37 –43.
13.Duncan R, Essat M, Jones G, et al. Systematic re-
view and qualitative evidence synthesis of patient-reported outcome measures for abdominal aortic
aneurysm. Br J Surg . 2017;104:317 –327.
14.Gökalp AL, Takkenberg JJM. Decision-making in
thoracic aortic aneurysm surgery-clinician and patientview. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2019;31:638 –642.
15.Tan MK, Jarral OA, Thong EH, et al. Quality of life
after mitral valve intervention. Interact Cardiovasc
Thorac Surg . 2017;24:265 –272.
16.Peach G, Romaine J, Wilson A, et al. Design of new
patient-reported outcome measures to assess quality
of life, symptoms and treatment satisfaction in pa-
tients with abdominal aortic aneurysm. Br J Surg .
2016;103:1003 –1011.
17.Brady AR, Thompson SG, Fowkes FG, et al. Abdom-
inal aortic aneurysm expansion: risk factors and time
intervals for surveillance. Circulation .2 0 0 4 ; 1 1 0 : 1 6 –21.
18.Badger SA, Jones C, McClements J, et al. Surveil-
lance strategies according to the rate of growth of
small abdominal aortic aneurysms. Vasc Med . 2011;16:
415–
421.
19.RESCAN Collaborators, Bown MJ, Sweeting MJ,
et al. Surveillance intervals for small abdominal aortic
aneurysms: a meta-analysis. JAMA . 2013;309:806 –
813.
20.Lomazzi C, Mascoli C, de Beaufort HWL, et al.
Gender related access complications after TEVAR:
analysis from the Retrospective Multicentre Cohort
GORE/C226GREAT Registry Study. Eur J Vasc Endovasc
Surg. 2020;60:203 –209.
21.Hendy K, Gunnarson R, Golledge J. Growth rates of
small abdominal aortic aneurysms assessed by com-
puterised tomography —a systematic literature review.
Atherosclerosis . 2014;235:182 –188.
22.Oliver-Williams C, Sweeting MJ, Jacomelli J, et al.
Safety of men with small and medium abdominal aortic
aneurysms under surveillance in the NAAASP. Circula-
tion. 2019;139:1371 –1380.
23.Maron BJ, Chaitman BR, Ackerman MJ, et al. Rec-
ommendations for physical activity and recreational
sports participation for young patients with genetic
cardiovascular diseases. Circulation . 2004;109:2807 –
2816.
24.Hiratzka LF, Bakris GL, Beckman JA, et al. 2010
ACCF/AHA/AATS/ACR/ASA/SCA/SCAI/SIR/STS/SVM
guidelines for the diagnosis and management of pa-
tients with thoracic aortic disease: a report of theAmerican College of Cardiology Foundation/AmericanHeart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines,American Association for Thoracic Surgery, AmericanCollege of Radiology, American Stroke Association,
Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists, Society
for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions,Society of Interventional Radiology, Society ofThoracic Surgeons, and Society for Vascular Medicine.J Am Coll Cardiol . 2010;55:e27 –e129.
25.Erbel R, Aboyans V, Boileau C, et al. 2014 ESC
guidelines on the diagnosis and treatment of aorticdiseases: document covering acute and chronic aorticdiseases of the thoracic and abdominal aorta of theadult. The Task Force for the Diagnosis and Treatmentof Aortic Diseases of the European Society of Cardi-ology (ESC). Eur Heart J . 2014;35:2873 –2926.
26.Cheng A, Owens D. Marfan syndrome, inherited
aortopathies and exercise: what is the right answer?Heart . 2015;101:752 –757.
27.Delsart P, Maldonado-Kauffmann P, Bic M, et al.
Post aortic dissection: gap between activityIsselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e384

recommendation and real life patients aerobic capac-
ities. Int J Cardiol . 2016;219:271 –276.
28.Nakayama A, Morita H, Nagayama M, et al. Cardiac
rehabilitation protects against the expansion ofabdominal aortic aneurysm. J Am Heart Assoc . 2018;7:
e007959.
29.Hatzaras IS, Bible JE, Koullias GJ, et al. Role of
exertion or emotion as inciting events for acute aortic
dissection. Am J Cardiol . 2007;100:1470 –1472.
30.Ulug P, Powell JT, Warschkow R, et al. Editor ’s
choice –sex speci ﬁc differences in the management of
descending thoracic aortic aneurysms: systematic re-view with meta-analysis. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg .
2019;58:503 –511.
31.Marcaccio CL, Schermerhorn ML. Epidemiology of
abdominal aortic aneurysms. Semin Vasc Surg .
2021;34:29 –37.
32.Thompson S, Brown L, Sweeting M, et al. Sys-
tematic review and meta-analysis of the growth andrupture rates of small abdominal aortic aneurysms:implications for surveillance intervals and their cost-effectiveness. Health Technol Assess . 2013;17:1 –118.
33.Salehi Ravesh M, Langguth P, Pfarr JA, et al. Non-
contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging forvisualization and quanti ﬁcation of endovascular aortic
prosthesis, their endoleaks and aneurysm sacs at 1.5T.
Magn Reson Imaging . 2019;60:164 –172.
34.Kawada H, Goshima S, Sakurai K, et al. Utility of
noncontrast magnetic resonance angiography for aneu-rysm follow-up and detection of endoleaks after endo-vascular aortic repair. Korean J Radiol . 2021;22:513 –524.
35.Fairman AS, Beck AW, Malas MB, et al. Reinter-
ventions in the modern era of thoracic endovascularaortic repair. J Vasc Surg . 2020;71:408 –422.
36.Coselli JS, Bozinovski J, LeMaire SA. Open surgical
repair of 2286 thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms.
Ann Thorac Surg . 2007;83:S862 –S864; discussion
S890-S892.
37.Aune D, Sen A, Kobeissi E, et al. Physical activity
and the risk of abdominal aortic aneurysm: a system-atic review and meta-analysis of prospective studies.Sci Rep . 2020;10:22287.
38.Mas-Stachurska A, Siegert AM, Batlle M, et al.
Cardiovascular bene ﬁts of moderate exercise training
in Marfan syndrome: insights from an animal model.
J Am Heart Assoc . 2017;6:e006438.
39.Gibson C, Nielsen C, Alex R, et al. Mild aerobic
exercise blocks elastin ﬁber fragmentation and aortic
dilatation in a mouse model of Marfan syndromeassociated aortic aneurysm. J Appl Physiol (1985)
.
2017;123:147 –160.
40.Thijssen CGE, Dekker S, Bons LR, et al. Health-
related quality of life and lived experiences in malesand females with thoracic aortic disease and their
partners. Open Heart . 2020;7:e001419.
41.Jarral OA, Kidher E, Patel VM, et al. Quality of life
after intervention on the thoracic aorta. Eur J Car-
diothorac Surg . 2016;49:369 –389.
11. Cost and Value Considerations
1.Anderson JL, Heidenreich PA, Barnett PG, et al. ACC/
AHA statement on cost/value methodology in clinicalpractice guidelines and performance measures: a
report of the American College of Cardiology/Amer-
ican Heart Association Task Force on PerformanceMeasures and Task Force on Practice Guidelines. JA m
Coll Cardiol . 2014;63:2304 –2322.
2.Thompson SG, Ashton HA, Gao L, et al. Screening men
for abdominal aortic aneurysm: 10 year mortality and cost
effectiveness results from the randomised MulticentreAneurysm Screening Study. BMJ. 2009;338:b2307.
3.Zarrouk M, Lundqvist A, Holst J, et al. Cost-effec-
tiveness of screening for abdominal aortic aneurysm in
combination with medical intervention in patients withsmall aneurysms. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg . 2016;51:
766 –773.
4.Wanhainen A, Lundkvist J, Bergqvist D, et al. Cost-
effectiveness of screening women for abdominal aortic
aneurysm. J Vasc Surg . 2006;43:908 –914; discussion
914.
5.Nargesi S, Abutorabi A, Alipour V, et al. Cost-
effectiveness of endovascular versus open repair of
abdominal aortic aneurysm: a systematic review. Car-
diovasc Drugs Ther . 2021;35:829 –839.
6.Trooboff SW, Wanken ZJ, Gladders B, et al. Longi-
tudinal spending on endovascular and open abdominalaortic aneurysm repair. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes .
2020;13:e006249.
7.Ulug P, Hinchliffe RJ, Sweeting MJ, et al. Strategy of
endovascular versus open repair for patients with clinicaldiagnosis of ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm: theIMPROVE RCT. Health Technol Assess .2 0 1 8 ; 2 2 : 1 –122.
8.IMPROVE Trial Investigators. Comparative clinical
effectiveness and cost effectiveness of endovascularstrategy v open repair for ruptured abdominal aorticaneurysm: three year results of the IMPROVE rando-
mised trial. BMJ. 2017;359:j4859.
9.Stroupe KT, Lederle FA, Matsumura JS, et al. Cost-
effectiveness of open versus endovascular repair ofabdominal aortic aneurysm in the OVER trial. J Vasc
Surg. 2012;56:901 –909.e902.
10.Epstein D, Sculpher MJ, Powell JT, et al. Long-
term cost-effectiveness analysis of endovascularversus open repair for abdominal aortic aneurysmbased on four randomized clinical trials. Br J Surg .
2014;101:623 –631.
11.van Bochove CA, Burgers LT, Vahl AC, et al. Cost-
effectiveness of open versus endovascular repair of
abdominal aortic aneurysm. J Vasc Surg . 2016;63:827 –
838.e822.
12.Arnaoutakis GJ, Hundt JA, Shah AS, et al.
Comparative analysis of hospital costs of open andendovascular thoracic aortic repair. Vasc Endovascular
Surg. 2011;45:39 –45.
13.Gillen JR, Schaheen BW, Yount KW, et al. Cost
analysis of endovascular versus open repair in thetreatment of thoracic aortic aneurysms. J Vasc Surg .
2015;61:596 –603.
14.Locham S, Dakour-Aridi H, Nejim B, et al. Out-
comes and cost of open versus endovascular repair of
intact thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm. J Vasc Surg .
2018;68:948 –955.e1.
15.McClure RS, Brogly SB, Lajkosz K, et al. Economic
burden and healthcare resource use for thoracic aortic
dissections and thoracic aortic aneurysms —a
population-based cost-of-illness analysis. J Am Heart
Assoc . 2020;9:e014981.
12.1. Biomarker Studies
1.Girdauskas E, Petersen J, Neumann N, et al. Novel
approaches for BAV aortopathy prediction-is there aneed for cohort studies and biomarkers? Biomolecules .
2018;8:58.
2.Bai W, Suzuki H, Huang J, et al. A population-
based phenome-wide association study of cardiacand aortic structure and function. Nat Med .
2020;26:1654 –1662.
3.Lesiak M, Augusciak-Duma A, Stepien KL, et al.
Searching for new molecular markers for cells obtained
from abdominal aortic aneurysm. J Appl Genet .
2021;62:487 –497.
4.Maredia AK, Greenway SC, Verma S, et al. Bicuspid
aortic valve-associated aortopathy: update on bio-
markers. Curr Opin Cardiol . 2018;33:134 –139.
5.Michelena HI, Della Corte A, Evangelista A, et al.
International consensus statement on nomenclature
and classi ﬁcation of the congenital bicuspid aortic
valve and its aortopathy, for clinical, surgical, inter-ventional and research purposes. Ann Thorac Surg .
2021;112:e203 –e235.
6.Portelli SS, Robertson EN, Malecki C, et al. Epige-
netic in ﬂuences on genetically triggered thoracic aortic
aneurysm. Biophys Rev . 2018;10:1241 –1256.
7.Zhu S, Zhu K, Li J, et al. Nano-biomaterials for the
delivery of therapeutic and monitoring cues for aortic
diseases. Front Bioeng Biotechnol . 2020;8:583879.
12.2. Genetic and Nongenetic Factors
1.Ashvetiya T, Fan SX, Chen YJ, et al. Identi ﬁcation of
novel genetic susceptibility loci for thoracic andabdominal aortic aneurysms via genome-wide associ-ation study using the UK Biobank Cohort. PLoS One .
2021;16:e0247287.
2.Faggion Vinholo T, Zafar MA, Ziganshin BA, et al.
Nonsyndromic thoracic aortic aneurysms and
dissections –is screening possible? Semin Thorac Car-
diovasc Surg . 2019;31:628 –634.
3.Kaluza J, Stackelberg O, Harris HR, et al. Mediter-
ranean diet is associated with reduced risk of abdom-inal aortic aneurysm in smokers: results of twoprospective cohort studies. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg .
2021;62:284 –293.
4.Kaluza J, Stackelberg O, Harris HR, et al. Anti-in-
ﬂammatory diet and risk of abdominal aortic aneurysm
in two Swedish cohorts. Heart . 2019;105:1876 –1883.
5.Lai CC, Lu CT, Kao KC, et al. Association of ﬂuo-
roquinolones use with the risk of aortic aneurysm oraortic dissection: facts and myths. J Microbiol Immunol
Infect . 2021;54:182 –184.
6.Milewicz DM, Regalado ES. Use of genetics for
personalized management of heritable thoracic aorticdisease: how do we get there? J Thorac Cardiovasc
Surg. 2015;149:S3 –S5.
7.Mordi IR, Forsythe RO, Gellatly C, et al. Plasma
desmosine and abdominal aortic aneurysm disease.J Am Heart Assoc . 2019;8:e013743.
8.Newton ER, Akerman AW, Strassle PD, et al. Asso-
ciation of ﬂuoroquinolone use with short-term risk of
development of aortic aneurysm. JAMA Surg .
2021;156:264 –272.
9.Stackelberg O, Bjorck M, Larsson SC, et al. Fruit and
vegetable consumption with risk of abdominal aorticaneurysm. Circulation . 2013;128:795 –802.
10.Stackelberg O, Bjorck M, Larsson SC, et al. Alcohol
consumption, speci ﬁc alcoholic beverages, andJACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee385

abdominal aortic aneurysm. Circulation . 2014;130:
646 –652.
12.3. Biomechanics of the Aorta
1.Cebull HL, Rayz VL, Goergen CJ. Recent advances in
biomechanical characterization of thoracic aortic an-eurysms. Front Cardiovasc Med . 2020;7:75.
2.Xuan Y, Wisneski AD, Wang Z, et al. Regional
biomechanical and failure properties of healthy humanascending aorta and root. J Mech Behav Biomed Mater .
2021;123:104705.
3.Chou EL, Xuan Y, Wang Z, Liu R, et al. Wall stress on
ascending thoracic aortic aneurysms with bicuspidcompared with tricuspid aortic valve. J Thorac Car-
diovasc Surg . 2018;156:492 –500.
4.Xuan Y, D ’Souza SN, Wang Z, et al. Patient-speci ﬁc
biomechanics in Marfan ascending thoracic aortic aneu-
rysms. Ann Thorac Surg . 2022;114(4):1367 –1375. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.athoracsur.2021.07.042
12.4. Sex, Race, and Ethnicity
1.Chen JF, Zafar MA, Wu J, et al. Increased virulence
of descending thoracic and thoracoabdominal aorticaneurysms in women. Ann Thorac Surg . 2021;112:45 –
52.
2.Cheung K, Boodhwani M, Chan KL, et al. Thoracic
aortic aneurysm growth: role of sex and aneurysmetiology. J Am Heart Assoc . 2017;6:e003792.
3.Chou EL, Pettinger M, Haring B, et al. Association of
premature menopause with risk of abdominal aortic
aneurysm in the Women ’s Health Initiative. Ann Surg .
2022;276(6):e1008 –e1016. https://doi.org/10.1097/
SLA.0000000000004581
4.Deery SE, Soden PA, Zettervall SL, et al. Sex dif-
ferences in mortality and morbidity following repair of
intact abdominal aortic aneurysms. J Vasc Surg .
2017;65:1006 –1013.
5.Lo RC, Schermerhorn ML. Abdominal aortic aneu-
rysms in women. J Vasc Surg . 2016;63:839 –844.
6.Nicolini F, Vezzani A, Corradi F, et al. Gender dif-
ferences in outcomes after aortic aneurysm surgeryshould foster further research to improve screeningand prevention programmes. Eur J Prev Cardiol .
2018;25:32 –41.
7.Nienaber CA, Fattori R, Mehta RH, et al. Gender-
related differences in acute aortic dissection. Circula-
tion. 2004;109:3014 –3021.
8.Olson SL, Wijesinha MA, Panthofer AM, et al. Eval-
uating growth patterns of abdominal aortic aneurysm
diameter with serial computed tomography surveil-lance. JAMA Surg . 2021;156:363 –370.
9.Preventza O, Cekmecelioglu D, Chatterjee S, et al.
Sex differences in ascending aortic and arch surgery: apropensity-matched comparison of 1153 pairs. Ann
Thorac Surg . 2022;113:1153 –1158.
10.Rylski B, Georgieva N, Beyersdorf F, et al. Gender-
related differences in patients with acute aorticdissection type A. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2021;162:
528–535.e1.
11.Spiliotopoulos K, Price MD, Amarasekara HS, et al.
Are outcomes of thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysmrepair different in men versus women? A propensity-matched comparison. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg .
2017;154:1203 –1214.e1206.
12.Tomee SM, Lijftogt N, Vahl A, et al. A registry-
based rationale for discrete intervention thresholds foropen and endovascular elective abdominal aorticaneurysm repair in female patients. J Vasc Surg .
2018;67:735 –739.
13.Tumer NB, Askin G, Akkaya BB, et al. Outcomes
after EVAR in females are similar to males. BMC Car-
diovasc Disord . 2021;21:301.
14.Vervoort D, Canner JK, Haut ER, et al. Racial dis-
parities associated with reinterventions after elective
endovascular aortic aneurysm repair. J Surg Res .
2021;268:381 –388.
15.Yang Y, Lehman EB, Aziz F. African Americans are
less likely to have elective endovascular repair ofabdominal aortic aneurysms. J Vasc Surg . 2019;70:
462 –470.
16.Yin K, AlHajri N, Rizwan M, et al. Black patients
have a higher burden of comorbidities but a lower riskof 30-day and 1-year mortality after thoracic endo-vascular aortic repair. J Vasc Surg . 2021;73:2071 –
2080.e2.
17.Cho L, Kibbe MR, Bakaeen F, et al. Cardiac surgery
in women in the current era: what are the gaps in care?Circulation . 2021;144:1172 –1185.
18.Mayor JM, Preventza O, McGinigle K, et al.
Persistent under-representation of female patients inUnited States trials of common vascular diseases from2008 to 2020. J Vasc Surg . 2022;75:30 –36.
19.Preventza O, Critsinelis A, Simpson K, et al. Sex,
racial, and ethnic disparities in U.S. cardiovascular tri-als in more than 230,000 patients. Ann Thorac Surg .
2021;112:726 –735.
12.5. Quality of Life in Patients With Aortic
Disease
1.Archer S, Pinto A, Vuik S, et al. Surgery, complica-
tions, and quality of life: a longitudinal cohort studyexploring the role of psychosocial factors. Ann Surg .
2019;270:95 –101.
2.Blakeslee-Carter J, Menon AJ, Novak Z, et al. As-
sociation of mental health disorders and aortic
dissection. Ann Vasc Surg . 2021;77:217 –225.
3.Ghanta RK, Green SY, Price MD, et al. Midterm
survival and quality of life after extent II thor-
acoabdominal aortic repair in Marfan syndrome. Ann
Thorac Surg . 2016;101:1402 –1409; discussion 1409.
4.Luo ZR, Liao DS, Chen LW. Comparative analysis of
postoperative sexual dysfunction and quality of life in
type A aortic dissection patients of different ages.J Cardiothorac Surg . 2021;16:117.
5.Nilsson O, Stenman M, Letterstal A, et al.
A randomized clinical trial of an eHealth intervention
on anxiety in patients undergoing abdominal aorticaneurysm surgery. Br J Surg . 2021;108:917 –924.
6.Smolock CJ, Xiang F, Roselli EE, et al. Health-
related quality of life after extensive aortic replace-
ment. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2021. S1043-
0679:00318-X.
7.Thijssen CGE, Doze DE, Gokalp AL, et al. Male-fe-
male differences in quality of life and coping style in
patients with Marfan syndrome and hereditary thoracicaortic diseases. J Genet Couns . 2020;29:1259 –1269.
8.Velvin G, Wilhelmsen JE, Johansen H, et al. Sys-
tematic review of quality of life in persons with he-
reditary thoracic aortic aneurysm and dissectiondiagnoses. Clin Genet . 2019;95:661 –676.
12.6. New Endovascular Technology
1.Czerny M, Rylski B, Morlock J, et al. Orthotopic
branched endovascular aortic arch repair in patientswho cannot undergo classical surgery. Eur J Car-
diothorac Surg . 2018;53:1007 –1012.
2.D’Onofrio A, Cibin G, Antonello M, et al. Endovas-
cular exclusion of the entire aortic arch with branchedstent-grafts after surgery for acute type A aorticdissection. JTCVS Tech . 2020;3:1 –8.
3.Haulon S, Greenberg RK, Spear R, et al. Global
experience with an inner branched arch endograft.
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2014;148:1709 –1716.
4.Kan X, Ma T, Lin J, et al. Patient-speci ﬁc simulation
of stent-graft deployment in type B aortic dissection:model development and validation. Biomech Model
Mechanobiol . 2021;20:2247 –2258.
5.L i uZ ,W uL ,Y a n gJ ,e ta l .T h o r a c i ca o r t as t e n t
grafts design in terms of biomechanical in-vestigations into ﬂexibility. Math Biosci Eng .
2020;18:800 –816.
6.Oderich GS, Tenorio ER, Mendes BC, et al. Midterm
outcomes of a prospective, nonrandomized study to
evaluate endovascular repair of complex aortic aneu-
rysms using fenestrated-branched endografts. Ann
Surg. 2021;274:491 –499.
12.7. Optimal Exercise and Rehabilitation
Protocols
1.Castaneda-Lopez J, Vasquez-Jimenez C, Medina-
Soto L, et al. Cardiac rehabilitation in a patient withDeBakey IIIb aortic disecction case report and litera-ture review. Arch Cardiol Mex . 2020;90:309 –312.
2.DeFabio DC, DeFabio CJ. Exercise parameters for the
chronic type B aortic dissection patient: a literature re-
view and case report. Postgrad Med . 2021;133:217 –222.
3.Delsart P, Maldonado-Kauffmann P, Bic M, et al.
Post aortic dissection: gap between activity recom-
mendation and real life patients aerobic capacities. Int
J Cardiol . 2016;219:271 –276.
4.Fuglsang S, Heiberg J, Hjortdal VE, et al. Exercise-
based cardiac rehabilitation in surgically treated type-
A aortic dissection patients. Scand Cardiovasc J .
2017;51:99 –105.
12.8. Equitable Care and Training Opportunities
1.Holscher CM, Weaver ML, Black JH 3rd, et al.
Regional market competition is associated with aneu-rysm diameter at the time of EVAR. Ann Vasc Surg .
2021;70:190 –196.
2.Mullan CW, Mori M, Bin Mahmood SU, et al. Inci-
dence and characteristics of hospitalization for prox-imal aortic surgery for acute syndromes and foraneurysms in the USA from 2005 to 2014. Eur J Car-
diothorac Surg . 2020;58:583 –589.
3.Zettervall SL, Buck DB, Soden PA, et al. Regional
variation exists in patient selection and treatment of
abdominal aortic aneurysms. J Vasc Surg . 2016;64:921 –
927.e1.
KEY WORDS ACC/AHA Clinical Practice
Guidelines, abdominal aortic aneurysm, aorticdissection, aortitis, aortopathy, bicuspid aorticvalve, blunt traumatic aortic injury, cardiacsurgery, guidelines, endovascular aortic repair,
heritable thoracic aortic disease, intramural
hematoma, malperfusion syndrome, marfansyndrome, loeys-dietz syndrome, penetratingatherosclerotic ulcer, thoracic aortic aneurysm,thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm, thoracicendovascular aortic repair, vascular surgeryIsselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e386

APPENDIX 1. AUTHOR RELATIONSHIPS WITH INDUSTRY AND OTHER ENTITIES (RELEVANT) —2022 ACC/AHA GUIDELINE FOR THE DIAGNOSIS
AND MANAGEMENT OF AORTIC DISEASE
Committee Member Employment Consultant Speakers BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalPersonal
ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational, or
Other Financial Bene ﬁtExpert
Witness
Eric M. Isselbacher (Chair) Massachusetts General Hospital —Director,
Healthcare Transformation Lab; Co-
Director, MGH Thoracic Aortic Center;
Harvard Medical School —Associate
Professor of MedicineNone None None None None None
James Hamilton Black III (Vice
Chair)Johns Hopkins Medicine —Professor of
SurgeryNone None None None None None
Ourania Preventza (Vice Chair) Baylor College of Medicine; Baylor
St. Luke ’s Medical Center —Professor
of Surgery, Division of Cardiothoracic
SurgerynTerumo Aortic (Bolton Medical)
nW.L. Gore & AssociatesNone None None None None
John G. Augoustides University of Pennsylvania —Professor,
Department of Anesthesiology and
Critical CareNone None None None None None
Adam W. Beck University of Alabama at Birmingham —
Professor and Director of Vascular
Surgery and Endovascular Therapy,
Department of SurgerynCook Medical
nCryolife
nEndologix
nPhilips
nTerumo Aortic (Bolton Medical)None None nCook Medical
nMedtronic
nTerumo Aortic
(Bolton Medical)
nW.L. Gore &AssociatesNone None
Michael A. Bolen Cleveland Clinic, Main Campus —Associate
Professor of Radiology, Division of
RadiologyNone None None None None None
Alan C. Braverman Washington University School of
Medicine —Alumni Endowed Professor in
Cardiovascular Diseases; Director, Marfan
Syndrome and Aortopathy
Clinic Cardiovascular Division,
Department of MedicineNone None None None None None
Bruce E. Bray University of Utah —Professor, Department
of Internal Medicine and Biomedical
InformaticsNone None None None None None
Maya M. Brown-Zimmerman Patient advocate None None None None None None
Edward P. Chen Duke University Medical Center —Professor
and Division Chief,
Division of Cardiovascular and Thoracic SurgeryNone None None
nBolton Medical *nBolton Medical † None
Continued on the next pageJACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee387

APPEDENDIX 1. CONTINUED
Committee Member Employment Consultant Speakers BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalPersonal
ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational, or
Other Financial Bene ﬁtExpert
Witness
Tyrone J. Collins Ochsner Medical Center —Section Head,
Interventional Cardiology, Co-Director,
Cardiac Catheterization Laboratory,
Department of Interventional CardiologynInspireMD None None None nW.L. Gore &
Associates †None
Abe DeAnda Jr UTMB-Galveston —Professor and Chief,
Division of Cardiovascular and Thoracic
Surgery,
Division of SurgeryNone None None None None None
Christina L. Fanola University of Minnesota —Assistant
Professor, Department of Cardiovascular
MedicinenJanssen Pharmaceuticals None None None None None
Leonard N. Girardi Weill Cornell Medicine —Professor and
Chairman,
Department of Cardiothoracic SurgeryNone None None None None None
Caitlin W. Hicks Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine —Associate Professor of Surgery,
Division of SurgeryNone None None None None None
Dawn S. Hui University of Texas Health San Antonio —
Associate Professor, Department of
Cardiothoracic SurgeryNone None None nAstellas Pharma * None None
William Schuyler Jones Duke University —Associate Professor of
Medicine & Director of Cardiac
Catheterization Laboratory, Division of
Medicine/CardiologynBayer ‡
nJanssen Pharmaceuticals ‡None None nBoehringer
Ingelheim
nBristol-Myers
SquibbNone None
Vidyasagar Kalahasti Cleveland Clinic —Assistant Professor,
Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Medicine
of the Case Western Reserve University;
Director, Marfan Syndrome & Connective
Tissue Disorder Clinic,
Aortic Center, Heart, Vascular and Thoracic
InstituteNone None None None None None
Karen M. Kim University of Michigan —Assistant
Professor,
Department of Cardiac SurgeryNone None None None None None
Continued on the next pageIsselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e388

APPEDENDIX 1. CONTINUED
Committee Member Employment Consultant Speakers BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalPersonal
ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational, or
Other Financial Bene ﬁtExpert
Witness
Dianna M. Milewicz University of Texas Health Science Center
at Houston —President George H.W. Bush
Chair of Cardiovascular Medicine Vice Chair,
Department of Internal Medicine Director,
Division of Medical Genetics Director,
Division of Internal MedicineNone None None None None None
Gustavo S. Oderich The University of Texas Health Science
Center at Houston, McGovern Medical
School —Professor of Surgery and Chief of
Vascular and Endovascular Surgery,
Director of Aortic Center,
Department of Cardio-Thoracic and Vascular
SurgerynCook Medical
nGE Healthcare
nW.L. Gore & AssociatesNone None nCook Medical ‡
nGE Healthcare ‡
nW.L. Gore &
Associates ‡nCenterline Biomed-
ical, Advisory BoardMember *
nCook Medical †
nPhilips, Advisory
Board Member
nW.L. Gore &
Associates †None
Laura Ogbechie Baylor College of Medicine —Nurse
Practitioner,
Department of Cardiothoracic SurgeryNone None None None None None
Susan B. Promes Penn State Health Hershey Medical
Center —Professor and Chair, Department of
Emergency MedicineNone None None None None None
Elsie Gyang Ross Stanford University School of Medicine —
Assistant Professor,
Department of Surgery and MedicineNone None None None None None
Marc L. Schermerhorn Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center —
George H. A. Clowes Jr. Professor of
Surgery, Chief, Division of Vascular and
Endovascular Surgery,
Department of SurgeryNone None None None nMedtronic,
Scienti ﬁcA d v i s o r y
Board Member *
nPhilips, Scienti ﬁc
Advisory Board
Member *None
Sabrina Singleton Times § American Heart Association/American
College of Cardiology Guideline AdvisorNone None None None None None
Continued on the next pageJACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee389

APPEDENDIX 1. CONTINUED
Committee Member Employment Consultant Speakers BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalPersonal
ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational, or
Other Financial Bene ﬁtExpert
Witness
Elaine E. Tseng University of California San Francisco; San
Francisco VA Medical Center —Professor of
Surgery University of California San
Francisco; Chief of Cardiothoracic Surgery,
San Francisco VA Department of SurgeryNone None None None nCryolife †‡ None
Grace J. Wang University of Pennsylvania Hospital —
Associate Professor of Surgery, Division of
Vascular Surgery and Endovascular TherapyNone None None None None None
Y. Joseph Woo Stanford University —Chair, Division of
Cardiothoracic SurgeryNone None None None None None
This table represents the relationships of committee members with industry and other entities that were determined to be relevant to this document. T hese relationships were reviewed and updated in conjunction with all meetings and/or conference calls
of the writing committee during the document development process. The table does not necessarily re ﬂect relationships with industry at the time of publication. A person is deemed to have a signi ﬁcant interest in a business if the interest represents
ownership of $5% of the voting stock or share of the business entity, or ownership of $$5,000 of the fair market value of the business entity; or if funds received by the person from the business entity exceed 5% of the person ’s gross income for the
previous year. Relationships that exist with no ﬁnancial bene ﬁt are also included for the purpose of transparency.
Relationships in this table are modest unless otherwise noted. According to the ACC/AHA, a person has a relevant relationship IF: a) the relationship or interest relates to the same or similar subject matter, intellectual property or asset, topic, or issue
addressed in the document; or b) the company/entity (with whom the relationship exists) makes a drug, drug class, or device addressed in the document or makes a competing drug or device addressed in the document ; or c) the person or a member of the
person ’s household , has a reasonable potential for ﬁnancial, professional or other personal gain or loss as a result of the issues/content addressed in the document .
*Noﬁnancial bene ﬁt.
†This disclosure was entered under the Clinical Trial Enroller category in the ACC ’s disclosure system. To appear in this category, the author acknowledges that there is no direct or institutional relationship with the trial sponsor as de ﬁned in the (ACCF or
AHA/ACC) Disclosure Policy for Writing Committees.‡Signiﬁcant relationship.
§Sabrina Singleton Times is an AHA/ACC joint staff member and acts as the Guideline Advisor for the “2022 ACC/AHA Guideline for the Diagnosis and Management of Aortic Disease. ”No relevant relationships to report. Nonvoting author on measures and
not included/counted in the RWI balance for this committee.
ACC indicates American College of Cardiology; ACCF, American College of Cardiology Foundation; AHA, American Heart Association; MGH, Massachuset ts General Hospital; RWI, relationships with industry and other entities; UTMB, University of Texas
Medical Branch; and VA, Veterans Affairs.Isselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e390

APPENDIX 2. REVIEWER RELATIONSHIPS WITH INDUSTRY AND OTHER ENTITIES (COMPREHENSIVE) —2022 ACC/AHA GUIDELINE FOR THE
DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF AORTIC DISEASE
Reviewer Employment ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalPersonal
ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational, or Other
Financial Bene ﬁtExpert
Witness
David P. Faxon (Peer Review
Committee Chair)Harvard University;
Brigham and Women ’s
HospitalNone None nREVA Medical nBoston Scienti ﬁc
(DSMB)
nCSL Behring (DSMB)
nMedtronic (DSMB) *None None
Gilbert R. Upchurch Jr
(Peer ReviewCommittee Vice Chair)University of Florida
College of MedicineNone None
nAntyllus * nNIH, PI * nBolton †
nCook †
nGore †
nMedtronic †None
Aaron W. Aday Vanderbilt University
Medical CenternOptumCare ‡
nTransThera SciencesNone None nJanssen Pharmaceuticals †
nUniversity of Manitoba †None
Ali Azizzadeh Cedars Sinai None None None None nGore † None
Michael Boisen
(representing SCA)University of Pittsburgh None None None None None None
Mohammad H. Eslami
(representing SVS)University of Pittsburgh None None None None None None
Beau Hawkins (representing
SVM)The University of Oklahoma
College of MedicinenBaim Institute forClinical ResearchNone None None
nBehring †
nBoston Scienti ﬁc†
nHemostemix †
nNIH †None
Christopher M. Kramer University of Virginia nBristol Myers
Squibb ‡
nCytokinetics
nEli Lilly
nXencorNone None nNHLBI ‡
nNIBIB ‡nCytokinetics †
nMyoKardia †None
Jessica G. Y. Luc University of British
ColumbiaNone None None None None None
Thomas E. MacGillivary
(representing STS)Houston Methodist None None None None nXylocor † None
Continued on the next pageJACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee391

APPEDENDIX 2. CONTINUED
Reviewer Employment ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalPersonal
ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational, or Other
Financial Bene ﬁtExpert
Witness
S. Christopher Malaisrie
(representing AATS)Northwestern University nArtivion
nMedtronicnEdwards
Lifesciences ‡
nTerumoNone nArtivion ‡
nAtricure
nEdwards Lifesciences ‡
nTerumo ‡nArtivion †
nEdwards Lifesciences †
nMedtronic †None
Kathryn Osteen Baylor University Louise
Herrington School of
NursingNone None None None nAHA *
nCongenital Heart Public
Health Consortium *
nSigma Theta Tau-Eta
Gamma Chapter *
nThe Children ’sH e a r t
Foundation *None
Himanshu J. Patel University of Michigan
HealthnEdwards
Lifesciences
nGore
nMedtronic ‡
nTerumoNone None None nEdwards Lifesciences †
nGore †
nMedtronic †
nNexus †None
Parag J. Patel (representing
SIR)Medical College of
WisconsinNone None None None nAHA *
nSIR*None
Wanda M. Popescu
(representing SCA)Yale School of Medicine None None None None nAmbu, Advisory Board
MemberNone
Evelio Rodriguez Ascension Tennessee Saint
Thomas HospitalnAbbott ‡
nEdwards
Lifesciences ‡nAbbott ‡
nEdwards
Lifesciences ‡
nPhilips ‡None nAbbott
nAtricure
nBoston Scienti ﬁc
nClaret
nDirect Flow
nEdwards Lifesciences ‡
nMedtronicnAbbott †
nAtricure †
nBoston Scienti ﬁc†
nEdwards Lifesciences †
nMedtronic †None
Rebecca Sorber Johns Hopkins University
School of MedicineNone None None None None None
Philip S. Tsao VA Palo Alto Health Care
System; Stanford
University School of
MedicineNone None None None None None
Continued on the next pageIsselbacher et al JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022
2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393e392

APPEDENDIX 2. CONTINUED
Reviewer Employment ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalPersonal
ResearchInstitutional,
Organizational, or Other
Financial Bene ﬁtExpert
Witness
Annabelle Santos
VolgmanRush College of Medicine nBristol Myers
Squibb, DCICDP
nJanssen
Pharmaceuticals
nMerck
nPﬁzer
nSanoﬁ‡None None nNIH ‡ nApple *
nNovartis †None
This table represents all reviewers ’relationships with industry and other entities that were reported at the time of peer review, including those not deemed to be relevant to this documen t, at the time this document was under review. The table does not
necessarily re ﬂect relationships with industry at the time of publication. A person is deemed to have a signi ﬁcant interest in a business if the interest represents ownership of 5% of the voting stock or share of the business entity, or ownership of $5000 of
the fair market value of the business entity; or if funds received by the person from the business entity exceed 5% of the person ’s gross income for the previous year. Relationships that exist with no ﬁnancial bene ﬁt are also included for the purpose of
transparency. Relationships in this table are modest unless otherwise noted. Names are listed in alphabetical order within each category of review. Please refer to https://www.acc.org/guidelines/about-guidelines-and-clinical-documents/ relationships-
with-industry-policy for de ﬁnitions of disclosure categories or additional information about the ACC/AHA Disclosure Policy for Writing Committees.
*Noﬁnancial bene ﬁt.
†This disclosure was entered under the Clinical Trial Enroller category in the ACC ’s disclosure system. To appear in this category, the author acknowledges that there is no direct or institutional relationship with the trial sponsor as de ﬁned in the (ACCF or
AHA/ACC) Disclosure Policy for Writing Committees.
‡Signiﬁcant relationship.
AATS indicates American Association for Thoracic Surgery; ACC, American College of Cardiology; ACCF, American College of Cardiology Foundation; A HA, American Heart Association; DCICDP, Diverse Clinical Investigator Career Development Program;
DSMB, data and safety monitoring board; NIH, National Institutes of Health; NHLBI, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; NIBIB, National Insti tute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering; PRC, Peer Review Committee; PI, principal investigator;
SCA, Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists; SIR, Society of Interventional Radiology; STS, Society of Thoracic Surgeons; SVM, Society for V ascular Medicine; SVS, Society for Vascular Surgery; and VA, Veterans Affairs.JACC VOL. 80, NO. 24, 2022 Isselbacher et al
DECEMBER 13, 2022:e223 –e393 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guidelinee393